the mississippi is well worth reading about. it is not a commonplace river but on the contrary is in all ways remarkable. considering the missouri its main branch it is the longest river in the world four thousand three hundred miles. it safe to say that it is also the river in the world since in one part of its journey it up one thousand three hundred miles to cover the same ground that the crow would fly over in six hundred and it three times as much water as the st. lawrence times as much as the rhine and three hundred and times as much as the thames. no other river so vast a it its water supply from and from delaware on the atlantic seaboard and from all the country between that and idaho on the pacific slope a spread of of longitude. the mississippi and to the gulf water from subordinate that are navigable by and from some that are navigable by flats and the area of its is as great as the combined of england wales scotland ireland france spain portugal germany austria italy and turkey; and almost all this wide region is fertile; the mississippi valley proper is exceptionally so. it is a remarkable river in this: that instead of widening toward its mouth it narrower; narrower and from the junction of the ohio to a point half way down to the sea the width a mile in high water: thence to the sea the width steadily until at the above the mouth it is but little over half a mile. at the junction of the ohio the depth is the depth gradually reaching one hundred and just above the mouth. the difference in rise and fall is also remarkable not in the upper but in the lower river. the rise is tolerably uniform down to natchez three hundred and sixty miles above the mouth about fifty but at bayou la fourche the river only at new orleans only fifteen and just above the mouth only two and one half. an article in the new orleans based upon of able that the river annually four hundred and six million tons of mud into the gulf of mexico which to mind captain rude name for the mississippi the great sewer. this mud solidified would make a mass a mile square and two hundred and high. the mud deposit gradually the land but only gradually; it extended it not quite a third of a mile in the two hundred years which have elapsed since the river took its place in history. the belief of the scientific people is that the mouth used to be at baton rouge where the cease and that the two hundred miles of land between there and the gulf was built by the river. this us the age of that piece of country without any trouble at all one hundred and twenty thousand years. yet it is much the batch of country that around there anywhere. the mississippi is remarkable in still another way its disposition to make prodigious by cutting through narrow of land and thus and shortening itself. more than once it shortened itself thirty miles at a single jump! these have had curious effects: they have thrown several river out into the rural and built up sand bars and in front of them. the town of delta used to be three miles below vicksburg: a recent cutoff radically changed the position and delta is now two miles above vicksburg. both of these river have been retired to the country by that cutoff. a cutoff havoc with boundary and for instance a man is living in the state of mississippi today a cutoff tonight and tomorrow the man himself and his land over on the other side of the river within the and subject to the laws of the state of louisiana! such a thing happening in the upper river in the old times could have transferred a slave from missouri to illinois and made a free man of him. the mississippi does not alter its locality by alone: it is always changing its habitat bodily is always moving bodily sidewise. at hard times la. the river is two miles west of the region it used to occupy. as a result the original site of that settlement is not now in louisiana at all but on the other side of the river in the state of mississippi. nearly the whole of that one thousand three hundred miles of old mississippi river which la salle down in his two hundred years ago is good solid dry ground now. the river to the right of it in and to the left of it in other although the mud land but slowly down at the mouth where the interfere with its work it fast enough in better protected higher up: for instance prophets island contained one thousand five hundred acres of land thirty years ago; since then the river added seven hundred acres to it. but enough of these of the mighty for the present i will give a few more of them further along in the book. let us drop the physical history and say a word about its historical history so to speak. we can glance briefly at its slumbrous first epoch in a couple of short at its second and epoch in a couple more; at its and epoch in a good many succeeding and then talk about its comparatively tranquil present epoch in what shall be left of the book. the world and the are so accustomed to use and overuse the word new in connection with our country that we early get and permanently retain the impression that there is nothing old about it. we do of course know that there are several comparatively old in american history but the mere convey to our no just idea no distinct realization of the stretch of time which they represent. to say that de the first white man who ever saw the mississippi river saw it in is a remark which a fact without interpreting it: it is something like giving the of a sunset by astronomical and the colors by their scientific names; as a result you get the bald fact of the sunset but you dont see the sunset. it would have been better to paint a picture of it. the date standing by itself means little or nothing to us; but when one a few neighboring historical and around it he perspective and color and then that this is one of the american which is quite respectable for age. for instance when the mississippi was first seen by a white man less than a quarter of a century had elapsed since francis i.s defeat at pavia; the death of raphael; the death of bayard sans sans the driving out of the from rhodes by the and the of the the act which the reformation. when de took his glimpse of the river ignatius loyola was an obscure name; the order of the was not yet a year old; michael paint was not yet dry on the last judgment in the sistine chapel; mary queen of scots was not yet born but would be before the year closed. catherine de medici was a child; elizabeth of england was not yet in her teens; calvin cellini and the emperor charles v. were at the top of their fame and each was manufacturing history after his own peculiar fashion; margaret of was writing the heptameron and some religious the first the are forgotten wit and indelicacy being sometimes better literature than holiness; lax court morals and the absurd chivalry business were in full feather and the joust and the tournament were the frequent pastime of titled fine who could fight better than they could spell while religion was the passion of their ladies and their offspring into of full rank and by brevet their pastime. in fact all around religion was in a peculiarly blooming condition: the council of trent was being the spanish inquisition was roasting and racking and burning with a free hand; elsewhere on the continent the were being persuaded to holy living by the sword and fire; in england henry viii. had suppressed the burnt fisher and another bishop or two and was getting his english reformation and his harem effectively when de stood on the banks of the mississippi it was still two years before death; eleven years before the burning of thirty years before the st. bartholomew slaughter; rabelais was not yet published; don quixote was not yet written; shakespeare was not yet born; a hundred long years must still elapse before would hear the name of oliver cromwell. unquestionably the discovery of the mississippi is a datable fact which considerably and the shiny newness of our country and her a most respectable of rustiness and antiquity. de merely the river then and was buried in it by his and one would expect the and the to multiply the by ten the spanish custom of the day and thus move other to go at once and explore it. on the contrary their when they home did not excite that amount of curiosity. the mississippi was left unvisited by whites during a term of years which incredible in our energetic days. one may sense the interval to his mind after a fashion by dividing it up in this way: after de the river a fraction short of a quarter of a century elapsed and then shakespeare was born; lived a trifle more than half a century then and when he had been in his grave considerably more than half a century the second white man saw the mississippi. in our day we dont allow a hundred and thirty years to elapse between of a marvel. if somebody should discover a creek in the county next to the one that the north pole is in europe and america would start fifteen costly thither: one to explore the creek and the other fourteen to hunt for each other. for more than a hundred and fifty years there had been white on our atlantic these people were in intimate communication with the in the south the were robbing and converting them; higher up the english were trading beads and to them for a consideration and throwing in civilization and whiskey for lagniappe; and in canada the french were schooling them in a rudimentary way among them and drawing whole of them at a time to quebec and later to montreal to buy of them. necessarily then these various of whites must have heard of the great river of the far west; and indeed they did hear of it vaguely so vaguely and indefinitely that its course and locality were hardly even guessable. the mere mysteriousness of the matter ought to have fired curiosity and exploration; but this did not occur. apparently nobody to want such a river nobody needed it nobody was curious about it; so for a century and a half the mississippi out of the market and undisturbed. when de found it he was not hunting for a river and had no present occasion for one; consequently he did not value it or even take any particular notice of it. but at last la salle the frenchman the idea of seeking out that river and exploring it. it always that when a man upon a neglected and important idea people inflamed with the same notion crop up all around. it so in this instance. naturally the question itself why did these people want the river now when nobody had wanted it in the five preceding apparently it was because at this late day they thought they had discovered a way to make it useful; for it had come to be that the mississippi into the gulf of california and therefore a short cut from canada to china. previously the supposition had been that it into the atlantic or sea of virginia. la salle himself for certain high and they were graciously him by louis xiv of inflated memory. chief among them was the privilege to explore far and wide and build and stake out and hand the same over to the king and pay the himself; in return some little of one sort or another; among them the monopoly of buffalo he spent several years and about all of his money in making perilous and painful between montreal and a fort which he had built on the illinois before he at last in getting his expedition in such a shape that he could strike for the mississippi. and meantime other had had better fortune. in joliet the merchant and marquette the priest crossed the country and the banks of the mississippi. they went by way of the great and from green bay in by way of fox river and the wisconsin. marquette had solemnly contracted on the feast of the immaculate conception that if the virgin would permit him to discover the great river he would name it conception in her honor. he kept his word. in that day all traveled with an outfit of de had with him. la salle had several also. the were often out of meat and scant of clothes but they always had the furniture and other for the mass; they were always prepared as one of the quaint of the time it to explain hell to the on the th of june the of joliet and marquette and their five the junction of the wisconsin with the mississippi. mr. before them a wide and rapid current coursed athwart their way by the foot of lofty heights wrapped thick in he turning southward they paddled down the stream through a solitude unrelieved by the trace of man. a big catfish with canoe and startled him; and reasonably enough for he had been by the that he was on a foolhardy journey and even a fatal one for the river contained a demon whose roar could be heard at a great distance and who would engulf them in the abyss where he dwelt. i have seen a mississippi catfish that was more than six long and weighed two hundred and fifty and if fish was the fellow to that one he had a fair right to think the roaring demon was come. at length the buffalo to appear grazing in on the great which then bordered the river; and marquette the fierce and stupid look of the old as they at the through the tangled mane which nearly blinded them. the moved cautiously: landed at night and made a fire to cook their evening meal; then extinguished it again paddled some way farther and anchored in the stream keeping a man on the watch till morning. they did this day after day and night after night; and at the end of two they had not seen a human being. the river was an awful solitude then. and it is now over most of its stretch. but at the close of the fortnight they one day came upon the of men in the mud of the western bank a robinson experience which an electric shiver with it yet when one on it in print. they had been that the river were as ferocious and pitiless as the river demon and destroyed all without waiting for provocation; but no matter joliet and marquette struck into the country to hunt up the of the they found them by and by and were hospitably received and well treated if to be received by an indian chief who taken off his last rag in order to appear at his level best is to be received hospitably; and if to be treated abundantly to fish porridge and other game dog and have these things forked into mouth by the ungloved of is to be well treated. in the morning the chief and six hundred of his the to the river and bade them a friendly farewell. on the above the present city of they found some rude and fantastic indian which they describe. a short distance below a torrent of yellow mud rushed furiously athwart the calm blue current of the mississippi boiling and surging and sweeping in its course and this was the mouth of the missouri that savage river which descending from its mad career through a vast unknown of barbarism its turbid into the bosom of its gentle sister. by and by they the mouth of the ohio; they they fought they along day after day through the deep silence and loneliness of the river drowsing in the scant shade of makeshift and broiling with the heat; they and exchanged with another party of and at last they the mouth of the arkansas about a month out from their where a tribe of out to meet and murder them; but they to the virgin for help; so in place of a fight there was a feast and plenty of pleasant palaver and folderol. they had proved to their satisfaction that the mississippi did not empty into the gulf of california or into the atlantic. they it into the gulf of mexico. they turned back now and carried their great news to canada. but belief is not proof. it was reserved for la salle to furnish the proof. he was provokingly delayed by one misfortune after another but at last got his expedition under way at the end of the year . in the dead of winter he and de son of lorenzo who the tontine his lieutenant down the illinois with a following of eighteen brought from new england and they moved in procession down the surface of the frozen river on foot and dragging their after them on at peoria lake they struck open water and paddled thence to the mississippi and turned their southward. they plowed through the fields of floating ice past the mouth of the missouri; past the mouth of the ohio and gliding by the of bordering swamp landed on the th of february near the third chickasaw where they and built fort again mr. they and with every stage of their adventurous progress the mystery of this vast new world was more and more unveiled. more and more they the of spring. the hazy sunlight the warm and drowsy air the tender foliage the opening the reviving life of nature. day by day they down the great bends in the shadow of the dense and in time at the mouth of the arkansas. first they were by the of this locality as marquette had before been by them with the booming of the war drum and the flourish of arms. the virgin composed the difficulty in case; the pipe of peace did the same office for la salle. the white man and the red man struck hands and entertained each other during three days. then to the admiration of the la salle set up a cross with the arms of france on it and took possession of the whole country for the king the cool fashion of the time while the priest piously consecrated the robbery with a hymn. the priest the of the faith by for the saving of the thus compensating them with possible in heaven for the certain on earth which they had just been of. and also by la salle drew from these simple of the forest of fealty to louis the putrid over the water. nobody at these colossal these took place on the site of the future town of napoleon arkansas and there the first was raised on the banks of the great river. and voyage of discovery ended at the same spot the site of the future town of napoleon. when de took his fleeting glimpse of the river away back in the dim early days he took it from that same spot the site of the future town of napoleon arkansas. therefore three out of the four memorable connected with the discovery and exploration of the mighty river by accident in one and the same place. it is a most curious distinction when one comes to look at it and think about it. france stole that vast country on that spot the future napoleon; and by and by napoleon himself was to give the country back again! make restitution not to the but to their white american the on touching here and there; the since become historic of vicksburg and grand gulf and an imposing indian monarch in the country whose capital city was a substantial one of sunbaked mixed with straw better than many that exist there now. the house contained an audience room forty square; and there he received in state surrounded by sixty old men clothed in white there was a temple in the town with a mud wall about it with of to the sun. the the natchez near the site of the present city of that name where they found a religious and political despotism a privileged class from the sun a temple and a sacred fire. it must have been like getting home again; it was home with an advantage in fact for it louis xiv. a few more days swept swiftly by and la salle stood in the shadow of his cross at the meeting of the waters from delaware and from and from the mountain close upon the pacific with the waters of the gulf of mexico his task finished his prodigy mr. in closing his fascinating narrative thus up: on that day the realm of france received on parchment a stupendous accession. the fertile of texas; the vast basin of the mississippi from its frozen northern to the sultry of the gulf; from the woody of the to the bare of the rocky a region of and deserts and grassy watered by a thousand ranged by a thousand warlike beneath the scepter of the sultan of versailles; and all by virtue of a feeble human voice inaudible at half a mile. apparently the river was ready for business now. but no the distribution of a population along its banks was as calm and deliberate and a process as the discovery and exploration had been. seventy years elapsed after the exploration before the had a white population worth considering; and nearly fifty more before the river had a commerce. between la opening of the river and the time when it may be said to have become the vehicle of anything like a regular and active commerce seven had occupied the throne of england america had become an independent nation louis xiv. and louis xv. had rotted and the french monarchy had gone down in the red tempest of the revolution and napoleon was a name that was beginning to be about. truly there were snails in those days. the earliest commerce was in great they and sailed from the upper to new orleans changed there and were tediously warped and back by hand. a voyage down and back sometimes occupied nine in time this commerce increased until it gave employment to of rough and hardy men; rude uneducated brave suffering terrific with sailorlike stoicism; heavy coarse in moral like the of that day heavy reckless every one jolly profane; prodigal of their money bankrupt at the end of the trip fond of barbaric finery prodigious yet in the main honest trustworthy faithful to and duty and often picturesquely magnanimous. by and by the steamboat then for fifteen or twenty years these men continued to run their downstream and the did all of the upstream business the selling their in new orleans and returning home as deck in the but after a while the so increased in number and in speed that they were able to absorb the entire commerce; and then a permanent death. the keelboatman a deck hand or a mate or a pilot on the steamer; and when were not open to him he took a berth on a pittsburgh or on a in the up toward the of the mississippi. in the heyday of the steamboating prosperity the river from end to end was with and timber rafts all by hand and of the rough whom i have been trying to describe. i remember the annual of mighty rafts that used to glide by hannibal when i was a boy an acre or so of white boards in each raft a crew of two dozen men or more three or four scattered about the rafts vast level space for and i remember the rude ways and the tremendous talk of their big the and their admiringly patterning for we used to swim out a quarter or third of a mile and get on these rafts and have a ride. by way of keelboat talk and manners and that and i will throw in in this place a from a book which i have been working at by and during the past five or six years and may possibly finish in the course of five or six more. the book is a story which details some in the life of an ignorant village boy huck finn son of the town drunkard of my time out west there. he run away from his persecuting father and from a persecuting good widow who to make a nice truthtelling respectable boy of him; and with him a slave of the also escaped. they have found a fragment of a lumber raft it is high water and dead summer time and are floating down the river by night and hiding in the by day bound for cairo whence the negro will seek freedom in the heart of the free but in a fog they pass cairo without knowing it. by and by they begin to suspect the truth and huck finn is persuaded to end the dismal suspense by swimming down to a huge raft which they have seen in the distance ahead of them creeping aboard under cover of the darkness and gathering the needed information by eavesdropping: but you know a young person cant wait very well when he is impatient to find a thing out. we it over and by and by jim said it was such a black night now that it wouldnt be no risk to swim down to the big raft and crawl aboard and listen they would talk about cairo because they would be calculating to go ashore there for a spree maybe or anyway they would send ashore to buy whiskey or fresh meat or something. jim had a wonderful level head for a : he could most always start a good plan when you wanted one. i stood up and shook my off and into the river and struck out for the rafts light. by and by when i got down nearly to her i eased up and went slow and cautious. but everything was all right nobody at the so i swum down along the raft till i was most abreast the camp fire in the middle then i aboard and inched along and got in amongst some of shingles on the weather side of the fire. there was thirteen men there they was the watch on deck of course. and a mighty lot too. they had a jug and tin and they kept the jug moving. one man was singing roaring you may say; and it wasnt a nice song for a parlor anyway. he through his nose and strung out the last word of every line very long. when he was done they all fetched a kind of injun and then another was sung. it begun: there was a woman in our in our did dwell she loved her husband but another man singing too she loved her husband but another man as and so on fourteen it was kind of poor and when he was going to start on the next verse one of them said it was the tune the old cow on; and another one said oh give us a rest. and another one told him to take a walk. they made fun of him till he got mad and up and begun to cuss the crowd and said he could lame any thief in the lot. they was all about to make a break for him but the biggest man there up and then he up in the air three times and cracked his together every time. he flung off a buckskin coat that was all hung with and you lay thar tell the done; and flung his hat down which was all over and you lay thar tell his is over. then he up in the air and cracked his together again and shouted out the old original from the of look at me! the man they call sudden death and general desolation! by a hurricane by an earthquake to the cholera nearly related to the smallpox on the side! look at me! i take nineteen and a of whiskey for breakfast when in robust health and a bushel of and a dead body when ailing! i split the everlasting with my glance and i squench the thunder when i speak! stand back and give me room according to my strength! my natural drink and the of the dying is music to my ear! cast your eye on me and lay low and hold your breath for bout to turn myself loose! all the time he was getting this off he was shaking his head and looking fierce and kind of swelling around in a little circle tucking up his and now and then up and beating his breast with his fist saying look at me when he got through he up and cracked his together three times and let off a roaring the son of a wildcat that then the man that had the row tilted his old slouch hat down over his right eye; then he bent stooping forward with his back and his south end sticking out far and his out and drawing in in front of him and so went around in a little circle about three times swelling himself up and breathing hard. then he and up and cracked his together three times before he lit again that made them cheer and he begun to shout like this bow your neck and spread for the kingdom of hold me down to the earth for i feel my a child of sin dont let me get a start! smoked glass here for all! dont attempt to look at me with the naked eye when playful i use the of longitude and of latitude for a seine and drag the atlantic ocean for i scratch my head with the lightning and purr myself to sleep with the thunder! when cold i bile the gulf of mexico and bathe in it; when hot i fan myself with an equinoctial storm; when thirsty i reach up and suck a cloud dry like a sponge; when i range the earth hungry famine in my bow your neck and spread! i put my hand on the face and make it night in the earth; i bite a piece out of the moon and hurry the i shake myself and crumble the contemplate me through leather dont use the naked eye! the man with a petrified heart and bowels! the massacre of isolated is the pastime of my idle the destruction of the serious business of my life! the boundless vastness of the great american desert is my enclosed property and i bury my dead on my own premises! he up and cracked his together three times before he lit they cheered him again and as he come down he shouted out: bow your neck and spread for the pet child of then the other one went to swelling around and blowing again the first one the one they bob; next the child of calamity chipped in again bigger than ever; then they both got at it at the same time swelling round and round each other and punching their most into each and whooping and like then bob the child names and the child him names back again: next bob him a heap rougher names and the child come back at him with the very worst kind of language; next bob the hat off and the child picked it up and ribbony hat about six foot; bob went and got it and said never mind this warnt going to be the last of this thing because he was a man that never forgot and never forgive and so the child better look out for there was a time just as sure as he was a living man that he would have to answer to him with the best blood in his body. the child said no man was than he was for that time to come and he would give bob fair warning now never to cross his path again for he could never rest till he had in his blood for such was his nature though he was sparing him now on account of his family if he had one. both of them was edging away in different growling and shaking their and going on about what they was going to do; but a little chap up and come back here you couple of and ill thrash the two of ye! and he done it too. he snatched them he them this way and that he booted them around he them sprawling faster than they could get up. why it warnt two minutes till they like dogs and how the other lot did yell and laugh and clap their hands all the way through and shout sail in hi! at him again child of calamity! bully for you little davy! well it was a perfect powwow for a while. bob and the child had red and black eyes when they got through. little davy made them own up that they were and and not fit to eat with a dog or drink with a ; then bob and the child shook hands with each other very solemn and said they had always respected each other and was willing to let be so then they washed their in the river; and just then there was a loud order to stand by for a crossing and some of them went forward to man the there and the rest went aft to handle the i laid still and for fifteen minutes and had a smoke out of a pipe that one of them left in reach; then the crossing was finished and they back and had a drink around and went to talking and singing again. next they got out an old fiddle and one played and another juba and the rest turned themselves loose on a regular keelboat breakdown. they keep that up very long without getting winded so by and by they settled around the jug again. they sung jolly jolly the life for me with a rousing chorus and then they got to talking about betwixt and their different kind of and next about and their different ways: and next about the best ways to put out that was afire; and next about what ought to be done with the and next about what a king had to do and how much he got; and next about how to make fight; and next about what to do when a man and next about betwixt and the man they ed said the muddy mississippi water was to drink than the clear water of the ohio; he said if you let a pint of this mississippi water settle you would have about a half to of an inch of mud in the bottom according to the stage of the river and then it warnt no better than ohio water what you wanted to do was to keep it stirred up and when the river was low keep mud on hand to put in and thicken the water up the way it ought to be. the child of calamity said that was so; he said there was nutritiousness in the mud and a man that drunk mississippi water could grow corn in his stomach if he wanted to. he you look at the that the tale. wont grow worth in a cincinnati graveyard but in a sent louis graveyard they grow upwards of eight hundred foot high. its all on account of the water the people drunk before they laid up. a cincinnati corpse dont richen a soil any. and they about how ohio water didnt like to mix with mississippi water. ed said if you take the mississippi on a rise when the ohio is low find a wide band of clear water all the way down the east side of the mississippi for a hundred mile or more and the minute you get out a quarter of a mile from shore and pass the line it is all thick and the rest of the way across. then they about how to keep tobacco from getting moldy and from that they went into and told about a lot that other folks had seen; but ed why dont you tell something that youve seen yourselves? now let me have a say. five years ago i was on a raft as big as this and right along here it was a bright moonshiny night and i was on watch and boss of the oar forrard and one of my was a man dick and he come along to where i was sitting forrard gaping and stretching he was and stooped down on the edge of the raft and washed his face in the river and come and set down by me and got out his pipe and had just got it filled when he up and why he aint that buck place over yander in the bend. yes i it is why. he laid his pipe down and leant his head on his hand and i thought it too when i went off watch we was standing six hours on and six off but the told me i that the raft didnt seem to hardly move for the last hour i though a slipping along all right now i. he give a kind of a groan and seed a raft act so before along here he to me the current most quit above the head of this bend the last two years he well he raised up two or three times and away off and around on the water. that me at it too. a body is always doing what he somebody else doing though there maynt be no sense in it. pretty soon i see a black something floating on the water away off to and quartering behind us. i see he was looking at it too. i an empty i why i a spyglass is a fool to your eyes. how can you tell its an empty he i dont know; i reckon it aint a but i thought it might be he. yes i so it might be and it might be anything else too; a body cant tell nothing about it such a distance as that i we nothing else to do so we kept on watching it. by and by i why dick that things on us i believe. he never said nothing. the thing and and i it must be a dog that was about tired out. well we swung down into the crossing and the thing across the bright streak of the moonshine and by george it was i dick what made you think that thing was a when it was a half a mile off i. he well i it was a seen it before; lots seen it; they its a haunted i the rest of the watch and they come and stood there and i told them what dick said. it right along abreast now and didnt gain any more. it was about twenty foot off. some was for it aboard but the rest didnt want to. dick said rafts that had with it had got bad luck by it. the captain of the watch said he didnt believe in it. he said he the on us because it was in a little better current than what we was. he said it would leave by and by. so then we went to talking about other things and we had a song and then a breakdown; and after that the captain of the watch for another song; but it was clouding up now and the stuck right thar in the same place and the song didnt seem to have much to it somehow and so they didnt finish it and there warnt any but it sort of flat and nobody said anything for a minute. then everybody tried to talk at once and one chap got off a joke but it warnt no use they didnt laugh and even the chap that made the joke didnt laugh at it which aint usual. we all just settled down glum and watched the and was and well sir it shut down black and still and then the wind begin to moan around and next the lightning begin to play and the thunder to grumble. and pretty soon there was a regular storm and in the middle of it a man that was running aft and fell and his ankle so that he had to lay up. this made the shake their and every time the lightning come there was that with the blue winking around it. we was always on the lookout for it. but by and by towards dawn she was gone. when the day come we see her anywhere and we warnt sorry neither. but next night about nine when there was and high jinks going on here she comes again and took her old roost on the side. there warnt no more high jinks. everybody got solemn; nobody you get anybody to do anything but set around moody and look at the it begun to cloud up again. when the watch changed the off watch stayed up stead of turning in. the storm and around all night and in the middle of it another man and his ankle and had to knock off. the left towards day and nobody see it go. everybody was sober and down in the mouth all day. i dont mean the kind of sober that comes of leaving liquor alone not that. they was quiet but they all drunk more than usual not together but each man off and took it private by himself. after dark the off watch didnt turn in; nobody sung nobody the didnt scatter around neither; they sort of huddled together forrard; and for two hours they set there perfectly still looking steady in the one direction and heaving a sigh once in a while. and then here comes the again. she took up her old place. she staid there all night; nobody turned in. the storm come on again after midnight. it got awful dark; the rain down; hail too; the thunder and and the wind a hurricane; and the lightning spread over everything in big of glare and the whole raft as plain as day; and the river up white as milk as far as you could see for miles and there was that along same as ever. the captain ordered the watch to man the after for a crossing and nobody would go no more for them they said. they wouldnt even walk aft. well then just then the sky split wide open with a crash and the lightning two men of the after watch and crippled two more. crippled them how you? why their the left in the dark betwixt towards dawn. well not a body eat a bite at breakfast that morning. after that the men around in and and low together. but none of them with dick they all give him the cold shake. if he come around where any of the men was they split up and away. they wouldnt man the with him. the captain had all the up on the raft alongside of his wigwam and wouldnt let the dead men be took ashore to be planted; he didnt believe a man that got ashore would come back; and he was right. after night come you could see pretty plain that there was going to be trouble if that come again; there was such a muttering going on. a good many wanted to kill dick because seen the on other and that had an ugly look. some wanted to put him ashore. some said all go ashore in a pile if the comes again. this kind of was still going on the men being together forrard watching for the when lo and behold you here she comes again. down she comes slow and steady and into her old you could a heard a pin drop. then up comes the captain and dont be a pack of and i dont want this to be dogging us all the way to orleans and you dont; well then the best way to stop it? burn it up thats the way. going to fetch it aboard he and before anybody could say a word in he went. he swum to it and as he come pushing it to the raft the men spread to one side. but the old man got it aboard and busted in the head and there was a baby in it! yes sir a stark naked baby. it was dick baby; he owned up and said so. yes he over it yes it is my own lamented darling my poor lost charles william deceased he for he could curl his tongue around the words in the language when he was a mind to and lay them before you without a anywheres. yes he said he used to live up at the head of this bend and one night he choked his child which was crying not intending to kill it which was a lie and then he was scared and buried it in a before his wife got home and off he went and struck the northern trail and went to and this was the third year that the had chased him. he said the bad luck always begun light and till four men was and then the didnt come any more after that. he said if the men would stand it one more night and was agoing on like that but the men had got enough. they to get out a boat to take him ashore and lynch him but he the little child all of a sudden and overboard with it up to his breast and shedding tears and we never see him again in this life poor old suffering soul nor charles william neither. why of course; didnt i tell you the baby was dead. been dead three years how could it cry? well never mind how it could cry how could it keep all that time? davy. you answer me that. i dont know how it done it ed. it done it though thats all i know about it. what was the brand on that eddy? a fellow they bill. say edwin was you one of the men that was by the lightning. davy. say edward dont you reckon youd better take a pill? you look bad dont you feel pale? the child of calamity. o come now eddy jimmy show up; you must a kept part of that to prove the thing by. show us the bunghole do and well all believe you. say bill less divide it up. thirteen of us. i can a thirteenth of the yarn if you can worry down the rest. ed got up mad and said they could all go to some place which he out pretty savage and then off aft to himself and they yelling and jeering at him and roaring and laughing so you could hear them a mile. well split a watermelon on that the child of calamity; and he come around in the dark amongst the shingle where i was and put his hand on me. i was warm and soft and naked; so he ouch! and back. fetch a lantern or a chunk of fire here theres a snake here as big as a cow! i to beg and crept out amongst them trembling. they me over wondering and the child of calamity no big bob less get out the paintpot and paint him a sky blue all over from head to heel and then heave him over! when the paint come and bob took the brush and was just going to begin the laughing and rubbing their hands i begun to cry and that sort of worked on davy and he vast there! he s nothing but a cub. ill paint the man that him! so i around on them and some of them and and bob put down the paint and the didnt take it up. come here to the fire and less see what up to here davy. now set down there and give an account of yourself. how long have you been aboard here? i warnt going to tell my name. i didnt know what to say so i just then they the whole crowd; and i was mighty glad i said that because maybe laughing would get them in a better humor. it wont hardly do charles william. you have growed this much in five year and you was a baby when you come out of the you know and dead at that. come now tell a straight story and hurt you if you aint up to anything wrong. what is your name? from a trading scow. she up the bend yonder. i was born on her. pap up and down here all his life; and he told me to swim off here because when you went by he said he would like to get some of you to speak to a mr. jonas turner in cairo and tell him they all and i tried again to talk but they broke in on me and stopped me. now davy; scared and so you talk wild. honest now do you live in a scow or is it a lie? yes sir in a trading scow. she up at the head of the bend. but i warnt born in her. its our first trip. no sir i didnt. it was only to get a ride on the raft. all does that. so they do. they might steal. if we let you off this time will you keep out of these kind of hereafter? all right then. you aint but little ways from shore. overboard with you and dont you make a fool of yourself another time this way. blast it boy some would rawhide you till you were black and blue! i didnt wait to kiss goodbye but went overboard and broke for shore. when jim come along by and by the big raft was away out of sight around the point. i swum out and got aboard and was mighty glad to see home again. the boy did not get the information he was after but his adventure furnished the glimpse of the departed raftsman and keelboatman which i desire to offer in this place. i now come to a phase of the mississippi river life of the flush times of steamboating which to me to warrant full examination the marvelous science of piloting as displayed there. i believe there been nothing like it elsewhere in the world. when i was a boy there was but one permanent ambition among my in our village footnote . hannibal missouri on the west bank of the mississippi river. that was to be a steamboatman. we had transient of other but they were only transient. when a circus came and went it left us all burning to become the first negro minstrel show that came to our section left us all suffering to try that kind of life; now and then we had a hope that if we lived and were good god would permit us to be these faded out each in its turn; but the ambition to be a steamboatman always once a day a cheap gaudy packet upward from st. louis and another downward from keokuk. before these the day was glorious with expectancy; after them the day was a dead and empty thing. not only the but the whole village felt this. after all these years i can picture that old time to myself now just as it was then: the white town drowsing in the sunshine of a morning; the streets empty or pretty nearly so; one or two sitting in front of the water street with their tilted back against the wall on over their asleep with enough around to show what broke them down; a sow and a litter of loafing along the sidewalk doing a good business in watermelon and two or three lonely little freight piles scattered about the levee; a pile of on the slope of the wharf and the fragrant town drunkard asleep in the shadow of them; two or three wood flats at the head of the wharf but nobody to listen to the peaceful lapping of the against them; the great mississippi the majestic the magnificent mississippi rolling its tide along shining in the sun; the dense forest away on the other side; the point above the town and the point below bounding the and turning it into a sort of sea and withal a very still and brilliant and lonely one. presently a film of dark smoke above one of those remote instantly a negro drayman famous for his quick eye and prodigious voice up the cry steamboat and the scene the town drunkard the wake up a furious clatter of every house and store out a human contribution and all in a twinkling the dead town is alive and moving. men all go hurrying from many quarters to a common center the wharf. there the people fasten their eyes upon the coming boat as upon a wonder they are seeing for the first time. and the boat is rather a handsome sight too. she is long and sharp and trim and pretty; she two tall with a gilded device of some kind swung between them; a fanciful pilothouse a glass and gingerbread on top of the texas deck behind them; the are gorgeous with a picture or with gilded above the name; the boiler deck the hurricane deck and the texas deck are and with clean white there is a flag gallantly flying from the the furnace are open and the glaring bravely; the upper are black with the captain by the big bell calm imposing the envy of all; great of the smoke are rolling and tumbling out of the a grandeur with a bit of pitch pine just before at a town; the crew are grouped on the forecastle; the broad stage is run far out over the port bow and an envied deckhand picturesquely on the end of it with a coil of rope in his hand; the pent steam is screaming through the the captain his hand a bell rings the stop; then they turn back churning the water to foam and the steamer is at rest. then such a scramble as there is to get aboard and to get ashore and to take in freight and to discharge freight all at one and the same time; and such a yelling and as the mates facilitate it all with! ten minutes later the steamer is under way again with no flag on the and no black smoke issuing from the after ten more minutes the town is dead again and the town drunkard asleep by the once more. my father was a justice of the peace and i supposed he possessed the power of life and death over all men and could hang anybody that offended him. this was distinction enough for me as a general thing; but the desire to be a steamboatman kept intruding nevertheless. i first wanted to be a so that i could come out with a white apron on and shake a tablecloth over the side where all my old could see me; later i thought i would rather be the deckhand who stood on the end of the with the coil of rope in his hand because he was particularly conspicuous. but these were only they were too heavenly to be as real by and by one of our went away. he was not heard of for a long time. at last he turned up as apprentice engineer or striker on a steamboat. this thing shook the bottom out of all my that boy had been notoriously worldly and i just the reverse; yet he was exalted to this eminence and i left in obscurity and misery. there was nothing generous about this fellow in his greatness. he would always manage to have a rusty bolt to scrub while his boat at our town and he would sit on the inside guard and scrub it where we could all see him and envy him and loathe him. and whenever his boat was laid up he would come home and swell around the town in his and clothes so that nobody could help remembering that he was a steamboatman; and he used all of steamboat in his talk as if he were so used to them that he forgot common people could not understand them. he would speak of the side of a horse in an easy natural way that would make one wish he was dead. and he was always talking about st. like an old citizen; he would refer casually to occasions when he was coming down fourth street or when he was passing by the house or when there was a fire and he took a turn on the brakes of the old big missouri; and then he would go on and lie about how many the size of ours were burned down there that day. two or three of the had long been of consideration among us because they had been to st. louis once and had a vague general knowledge of its but the day of their glory was over now. they lapsed into a humble silence and learned to disappear when the ruthless this fellow had money too and hair oil. also an ignorant silver watch and a showy brass watch chain. he wore a leather belt and used no suspenders. if ever a youth was cordially admired and hated by his this one was. no girl could withstand his he cut out every boy in the village. when his boat up at last it diffused a tranquil contentment among us such as we had not known for but when he came home the next week alive renowned and in church all battered up and bandaged a shining hero at and over by everybody it to us that the partiality of providence for an undeserving reptile had a point where it was open to criticism. this career could produce but one result and it speedily boy after boy to get on the river. the son an engineer. the and the sons mud the wholesale liquor son a barkeeper on a boat; four sons of the chief merchant and two sons of the county judge pilot was the position of all. the pilot even in those days of trivial wages had a princely salary from a hundred and fifty to two hundred and fifty a month and no board to pay. two of his wages would pay a salary for a year. now some of us were left disconsolate. we could not get on the river at least our would not let us. so by and by i ran away. i said i never would come home again till i was a pilot and could come in glory. but somehow i could not manage it. i went meekly aboard a few of the that lay packed together like at the long st. louis wharf and very humbly for the but got only a cold shoulder and short words from mates and i had to make the best of this sort of treatment for the time being but i had comforting of a future when i should be a great and honored pilot with plenty of money and could kill some of these mates and and pay for them. afterward the hope within me to a reluctant death and i found myself without an ambition. but i was ashamed to go home. i was in cincinnati and i set to work to map out a new career. i had been reading about the recent exploration of the river amazon by an expedition sent out by our government. it was said that the expedition owing to had not thoroughly a part of the country lying about the some four thousand miles from the mouth of the river. it was only about fifteen hundred miles from cincinnati to new orleans where i could doubtless get a ship. i had thirty left; i would go and complete the exploration of the amazon. this was all the thought i gave to the subject. i never was great in of detail. i packed my valise and took passage on an ancient tub the paul jones for new orleans. for the sum of sixteen i had the scarred and of her main saloon principally to myself for she was not a creature to attract the eye of wiser when we presently got under way and went poking down the broad ohio i a new being and the subject of my own admiration. i was a traveler! a word never had tasted so good in my mouth before. i had an exultant sense of being bound for mysterious and distant which i never have felt in so uplifting a degree since. i was in such a glorified condition that all ignoble feelings departed out of me and i was able to look down and pity the untraveled with a compassion that had hardly a trace of contempt in it. still when we stopped at and i could not help carelessly upon the of the boiler deck to enjoy the envy of the country on the bank. if they did not seem to discover me i presently to attract their attention or moved to a position where they could not help seeing me. and as soon as i knew they saw me i and stretched and gave other of being mightily bored with traveling. i kept my hat off all the time and stayed where the wind and the sun could strike me because i wanted to get the bronzed and look of an old traveler. before the second day was half gone i experienced a joy which filled me with the gratitude; for i saw that the skin had begun to blister and peel off my face and neck. i wished that the and at home could see me now. we louisville in time at least the neighborhood of it. we stuck hard and fast on the in the middle of the river and lay there four days. i was now beginning to feel a strong sense of being a part of the family a sort of infant son to the captain and younger brother to the there is no the pride i took in this grandeur or the affection that to swell and grow in me for those people. i could not know how the lordly steamboatman that sort of presumption in a mere landsman. i particularly to acquire the least trifle of notice from the big stormy mate and i was on the alert for an opportunity to do him a service to that end. it came at last. the riotous powwow of setting a spar was going on down on the forecastle and i went down there and stood around in the way or mostly skipping out of it till the mate suddenly a general order for somebody to bring him a capstan bar. i sprang to his side and said: tell me where it is ill fetch it! if a ragpicker had to do a diplomatic service for the emperor of russia the monarch could not have been more astounded than the mate was. he even stopped swearing. he stood and down at me. it took him ten to scrape his disjointed remains together again. then he said impressively: well if this dont beat hell! and turned to his work with the air of a man who had been with a problem too abstruse for solution. i crept away and solitude for the rest of the day. i did not go to dinner; i stayed away from supper until everybody else had finished. i did not feel so much like a member of the family now as before. however my spirits returned in as we pursued our way down the river. i was sorry i hated the mate so because it was not in young human nature not to admire him. he was huge and muscular his face was bearded and whiskered all over; he had a red woman and a blue woman on his right arm one on each side of a blue anchor with a red rope to it; and in the matter of profanity he was sublime. when he was getting out cargo at a landing i was always where i could see and hear. he felt all the majesty of his great position and made the world feel it too. when he gave even the order he discharged it like a blast of lightning and sent a long reverberating peal of profanity thundering after it. i could not help contrasting the way in which the average landsman would give an order with the mates way of doing it. if the landsman should wish the gangplank moved a foot farther forward he would probably say: james or william one of you push that plank forward please; but put the mate in his place and he would roar out: here now start that gangplank lively now! you about! snatch it! snatch it! there! there! aft again! aft again! dont you hear me. dash it to dash! are you going to sleep over it! vast heaving. vast heaving i tell you! going to heave it clear astern? you going with that barrel! with it fore i make you swallow it you split between a tired and a crippled when the soreness of my adventure with the mate had somewhat worn off i timidly to make up to the official connected with the boat the night watchman. he snubbed my at first but i presently to offer him a new chalk pipe; and that softened him. so he me to sit with him by the big bell on the hurricane deck and in time he melted into conversation. he could not well have it i hung with such homage on his words and so plainly that i felt honored by his notice. he told me the names of dim capes and shadowy as we by them in the solemnity of the night under the winking and by and by got to talking about himself. he oversentimental for a man whose salary was six a week or rather he might have so to an older person than i. but i drank in his words hungrily and with a faith that might have moved if it had been applied judiciously. what was it to me that he was soiled and seedy and fragrant with gin? what was it to me that his grammar was bad his construction worse and his profanity so void of art that it was an element of weakness rather than strength in his conversation? he was a wronged man a man who had seen trouble and that was enough for me. as he mellowed into his plaintive history his tears upon the lantern in his lap and i cried too from sympathy. he said he was the son of an english nobleman either an earl or an alderman he could not remember which but was both; his father the nobleman loved him but his mother hated him from the cradle; and so while he was still a little boy he was sent to one of them old ancient he remember which; and by and by his father and his mother the property and shook him as he it. after his mother shook him of the nobility with whom he was acquainted used their influence to get him the position of in a ship; and from that point my watchman threw off all of date and locality and branched out into a narrative that bristled all along with incredible a narrative that was so reeking with bloodshed and so with hairbreadth and the most engaging and unconscious personal that i sat speechless enjoying shuddering wondering it was a sore blight to find out afterwards that he was a low vulgar ignorant sentimental humbug an untraveled native of the of illinois who had absorbed wildcat literature and its until in time he had woven odds and of the mess into this yarn and then gone on telling it to like me until he had come to believe it himself. what with lying on the four days at louisville and some other the poor old paul jones away about two in making the voyage from cincinnati to new orleans. this gave me a chance to get acquainted with one of the and he taught me how to steer the boat and thus made the fascination of river life more potent than ever for me. it also gave me a chance to get acquainted with a youth who had taken deck passage mores the pity; for he easily six of me on a promise to return to the boat and pay it back to me the day after we should arrive. but he probably or forgot for he never came. it was doubtless the former since he had said his were wealthy and he only traveled deck passage because it was . deck passage i.e. steerage passage. i soon discovered two things. one was that a vessel would not be likely to sail for the mouth of the amazon under ten or twelve years; and the other was that the nine or ten still left in my pocket would not suffice for so imposing an exploration as i had planned even if i could afford to wait for a ship. therefore it that i must contrive a new career. the paul jones was now bound for st. louis. i planned a siege against my pilot and at the end of three hard days he he agreed to teach me the mississippi river from new orleans to st. louis for five hundred payable out of the first wages i should receive after graduating. i upon the small enterprise of learning twelve or thirteen hundred miles of the great mississippi river with the easy confidence of my time of life. if i had really known what i was about to require of my i should not have had the courage to begin. i supposed that all a pilot had to do was to keep his boat in the river and i did not consider that that could be much of a trick since it was so wide. the boat backed out from new orleans at four in the afternoon and it was our watch until eight. mr. my chief her up plowed her along past the of the other that lay at the levee and then said here take her; shave those as close as youd peel an apple. i took the wheel and my heartbeat up into the for it to me that we were about to scrape the side off every ship in the line we were so close. i held my breath and to claw the boat away from the danger; and i had my own opinion of the pilot who had known no better than to get us into such peril but i was too wise to express it. in half a minute i had a wide margin of safety intervening between the paul jones and the and within ten more i was set aside in disgrace and mr. was going into danger again and me alive with abuse of my cowardice. i was stung but i was obliged to admire the easy confidence with which my chief from side to side of his wheel and trimmed the so closely that disaster ceaselessly imminent. when he had a little he told me that the easy water was close ashore and the current outside and therefore we must hug the bank upstream to get the benefit of the former and stay well out downstream to take advantage of the latter. in my own mind i resolved to be a downstream pilot and leave the to people dead to prudence. now and then mr. my attention to certain things. said he this is point. i assented. it was pleasant enough information but i could not see the bearing of it. i was not conscious that it was a matter of any interest to me. another time he said this is point. later he said this is point. they were all about level with the waters edge; they all about alike to me; they were monotonously unpicturesque. i hoped mr. would change the subject. but no; he would crowd up around a point hugging the shore with affection and then say: the slack water here abreast this bunch of now we cross over. so he crossed over. he gave me the wheel once or twice but i had no luck. i either came near chipping off the edge of a sugar plantation or i too far from shore and so back into disgrace again and got abused. the watch was ended at last and we took supper and went to bed. at midnight the glare of a lantern shone in my eyes and the night watchman said and then he left. i could not understand this extraordinary procedure; so i presently gave up trying to and dozed off to sleep. pretty soon the watchman was back again and this time he was gruff. i was annoyed. i said: what do you want to come around here in the middle of the night for. now as like as not ill not get to sleep again tonight. the was just turning in and i heard some brutal laughter from them and such as hello watchman! ant the new cub turned out yet? delicate likely. give him some sugar in a rag and send for the chambermaid to sing to him. about this time mr. on the scene. something like a minute later i was climbing the pilothouse steps with some of my clothes on and the rest in my arms. mr. was close behind here was something fresh this thing of getting up in the middle of the night to go to work. it was a detail in piloting that had never to me at all. i knew that ran all night but somehow i had never to reflect that somebody had to get up out of a warm bed to run them. i to fear that piloting was not quite so romantic as i had it was; there was something very real and about this new phase of it. it was a rather dingy night although a fair number of were out. the big mate was at the wheel and he had the old tub pointed at a star and was holding her straight up the middle of the river. the on either hand were not much more than half a mile apart but they wonderfully far away and ever so vague and indistinct. the mate said: the vengeful spirit in me i said to myself i wish you joy of your job mr. have a good time finding mr. plantation such a night as this; and i hope you never will find it as long as you live. i cant do it. the there are out of water at this stage: its no great distance to the lower and have to get along with that. all right sir. if jones dont like it hell have to lump it i reckon. and then the mate left. my exultation to cool and my wonder to come up. here was a man who not only to find this plantation on such a night but to find either end of it you preferred. i dreadfully wanted to ask a question but i was carrying about as many short as my would admit of so i held my peace. all i desired to ask mr. was the simple question whether he was ass enough to really imagine he was going to find that plantation on a night when all were exactly alike and all the same color. but i held in. i used to have fine of prudence in those days. mr. made for the shore and soon was scraping it just the same as if it had been daylight. and not only that but singing it to me that i had put my life in the keeping of a peculiarly reckless outcast. presently he turned on me and said: i was gratified to be able to answer promptly and i did. i said i didnt know. this manner jolted me. i was down at the foot again in a moment. but i had to say just what i had said before. well a smart one said mr. whats the name of the next point? well this beats anything. tell me the name of any point or place i told you. look here! what do you start out from above point to cross over? you you dont know? my drawling manner of speech. what do you know? by the great ghost i believe you! the dunderhead i ever saw or ever heard of so help me moses! the idea of you being a pilot you! why you dont know enough to pilot a cow down a lane. oh but his wrath was up! he was a nervous man and he from one side of his wheel to the other as if the floor was hot. he would boil a while to himself and then overflow and scald me again. look here! what do you suppose i told you the names of those for? i tremblingly considered a moment and then the devil of temptation provoked me to say: this was a red rag to the bull. he and so he was crossing the river at the time that i judge it made him blind because he ran over the of a of course the sent up a volley of profanity. never was a man so grateful as mr. was: because he was brim full and here were who would talk back. he threw open a window thrust his head out and such an irruption as i never had heard before. the fainter and farther away the the higher mr. lifted his voice and the his grew. when he closed the window he was empty. you could have drawn a seine through his system and not caught enough to disturb your mother with. presently he said to me in the way my boy you must get a little memorandum book and every time i tell you a thing put it down right away. theres only one way to be a pilot and that is to get this entire river by heart. you have to know it just like a b c. that was a dismal revelation to me; for my memory was never loaded with anything but blank however i did not feel discouraged long. i that it was best to make some for doubtless mr. was stretching. presently he a rope and struck a few on the big bell. the were all gone now and the night was as black as ink. i could hear the churn along the bank but i was not entirely certain that i could see the shore. the voice of the invisible watchman up from the hurricane deck i said to myself i wish i might venture to offer a small bet that it but i did not chirp. i only to see. mr. handled the engine and in due time the nose came to the land a torch from the forecastle a man ashore a voice on the bank said de mars jones and the next moment we were standing up the river again all serene. i reflected deeply awhile and then said but not aloud well the finding of that plantation was the accident that ever but it happen again in a hundred years. and i fully it was an accident too. by the time we had gone seven or eight hundred miles up the river i had learned to be a tolerably plucky upstream steersman in daylight and before we st. louis i had made a trifle of progress in nightwork but only a trifle. i had a notebook that fairly bristled with the names of bars bends but the information was to be found only in the notebook none of it was in my head. it made my heart ache to think i had only got half of the river set down; for as our watch was four hours off and four hours on day and night there was a long gap in my book for every time i had slept since the voyage my chief was presently hired to go on a big new orleans boat and i packed my satchel and went with him. she was a grand affair. when i stood in her pilothouse i was so far above the water that i on a mountain; and her stretched so far away fore and aft below me that i how i could ever have considered the little paul jones a large craft. there were other too. the paul pilothouse was a cheap dingy battered rattletrap cramped for room: but here was a sumptuous glass temple; room enough to have a dance in; showy red and gold an imposing sofa; leather and a back to the high bench where visiting sit to spin and look at the river; bright fanciful instead of a broad wooden box filled with sawdust; nice new oilcloth on the floor; a hospitable big stove for winter; a wheel as high as my head costly with inlaid work; a wire bright brass for the and a tidy black to bring up and and coffee during midwatch day and night. now this was something like and so i to take heart once more to believe that piloting was a romantic sort of occupation after all. the moment we were under way i to prowl about the great steamer and fill myself with joy. she was as clean and as dainty as a when i down her long gilded saloon it was like gazing through a splendid tunnel; she had an by some gifted on every stateroom door; she with no end of the office was elegant the bar was marvelous and the barkeeper had been and upholstered at incredible cost. the boiler deck i.e. the second story of the boat so to speak was as spacious as a church it to me; so with the forecastle; and there was no pitiful handful of and down there but a whole battalion of men. the were fiercely glaring from a long row of and over them were eight huge this was unutterable pomp. the mighty but enough of this. i had never felt so fine before. and when i found that the regiment of natty respectfully me my satisfaction was complete. when i returned to the pilothouse st. louis was gone and i was lost. here was a piece of river which was all down in my book but i could make neither head nor tail of it: you understand it was turned around. i had seen it when coming upstream but i had never faced about to see how it when it was behind me. my heart broke again for it was plain that i had got to learn this troublesome river both ways. the pilothouse was full of going down to look at the river. what is the upper river the two hundred miles between st. louis and cairo where the ohio comes in was low; and the mississippi its channel so constantly that the used to always find it necessary to run down to cairo to take a fresh look when their were to lie in port a week; that is when the water was at a low stage. a deal of this looking at the river was done by poor who seldom had a berth and whose only hope of getting one lay in their being always freshly posted and therefore ready to drop into the shoes of some reputable pilot for a single trip on account of such sudden illness or some other necessity. and a good many of them constantly ran up and down the river not because they ever really hoped to get a berth but because they being of the boat it was to look at the river than stay ashore and pay board. in time these grew dainty in their and only that had an established reputation for setting good tables. all visiting were useful for they were always ready and willing winter or summer night or day to go out in the yawl and help buoy the channel or assist the in any way they could. they were likewise welcome because all are tireless when gathered together and as they talk only about the river they are always understood and are always interesting. your true pilot nothing about anything on earth but the river and his pride in his occupation the pride of we had a fine company of these along this trip. there were eight or ten; and there was abundance of room for them in our great pilothouse. two or three of them wore polished silk elaborate diamond kid and boots. they were choice in their english and bore themselves with a dignity proper to men of solid means and prodigious reputation as the were more or less loosely clad and wore upon their tall felt cones that were suggestive of the days of the commonwealth. i was a cipher in this august company and felt subdued not to say torpid. i was not even of sufficient consequence to assist at the wheel when it was necessary to put the tiller hard down in a hurry; the guest that stood nearest did that when occasion required and this was pretty much all the time because of the crookedness of the channel and the scant water. i stood in a corner; and the talk i to took the hope all out of me. one visitor said to another it was in the night there and i ran it the way one of the on the diana told me; out about fifty above the wood pile on the false point and held on the cabin under plum point till i raised the reef quarter less twain then up for the middle bar till i got well abreast the old cottonwood in the bend then got my stern on the cottonwood and head on the low place above the point and came through nine and a half. i had better water than that and ran it lower down; out from the false point mark twain raised the second reef abreast the big snag in the bend and had quarter less twain. i dont want to find fault with your but thats a good deal of water for plum point it to me. there was an approving nod all around as this quiet snub on the boaster and settled him. and so they went on meantime the thing that was running in my mind was now if my hear aright i have not only to get the names of all the and and bends and so on by heart but i must even get up a warm personal acquaintanceship with every old snag and cottonwood and obscure wood pile that the banks of this river for twelve hundred miles; and more than that i must actually know where these things are in the dark unless these are gifted with eyes that can pierce through two miles of solid blackness; i wish the piloting business was in jericho and i had never thought of it. at dusk mr. tapped the big bell three times the signal to land and the captain from his in the forward end of the texas and up inquiringly. mr. said that was all. the boat came to shore and was tied up for the night. it to me a fine thing that the pilot could do as he pleased without asking so grand a permission. i took my supper and went immediately to bed discouraged by my days and my late was but a confusion of meaningless names. it had tangled me all up in a knot every time i had at it in the daytime. i now hoped for respite in sleep; but no it all through my head till sunrise again a frantic and tireless nightmare. next morning i felt pretty rusty and we went booming along taking a good many for we were anxious to get out of the river as getting out to cairo was before night should overtake us. but mr. partner the other pilot presently grounded the boat and we lost so much time in getting her off that it was plain that darkness would overtake us a good long way above the mouth. this was a great misfortune especially to certain of our visiting whose would have to wait for their return no matter how long that might be. it the pilothouse talk a good deal. coming upstream did not mind low water or any kind of darkness; nothing stopped them but fog. but downstream work was different; a boat was too nearly helpless with a stiff current pushing behind her; so it was not customary to run downstream at night in low water. there to be one small hope however: if we could get through the intricate and dangerous hat island crossing before night we could venture the rest for we would have plainer sailing and better water. but it would be insanity to attempt hat island at night. so there was a deal of looking at all the rest of the day and a constant upon the speed we were making; hat island was the eternal subject; sometimes hope was high and sometimes we were delayed in a bad crossing and down it went again. for hours all hands lay under the burden of this suppressed excitement; it was even to me and i got to feeling so solicitous about hat island and under such an awful pressure of responsibility that i wished i might have five minutes on shore to draw a good full relieving breath and start over again. we were standing no regular each of our ran such of the river as he had run when coming upstream because of his greater familiarity with it; but both in the pilot house constantly. an hour before sunset mr. took the wheel and mr. w stepped aside. for the next thirty minutes every man held his watch in his hand and was restless silent and uneasy. at last somebody said with a doomful sigh well hat island and we cant make it. all the closed with a snap everybody and something about its being too bad too bad ah if we could only have got here half an hour sooner! and the place was thick with the atmosphere of disappointment. some to go out but hearing no to land. the sun dipped behind the horizon the boat went on. inquiring from one guest to another; and one who had his hand on the doorknob and had turned it then presently took away his hand and let the knob turn back again. we bore steadily down the bend. more were exchanged and of surprised admiration but no words. insensibly the men drew together behind mr. as the sky darkened and one or two dim came out. the dead silence and sense of waiting oppressive. mr. the cord and two deep mellow from the big bell off on the night. then a pause and one more note was struck. the voice from the hurricane deck the of the to rise out of the distance and were gruffly repeated by the on the hurricane deck. mark three!... mark three!... three!... half twain!... quarter twain!... mark twain!... mr. two and was by faint far below in the engine room and our speed the steam to whistle through the the of the went on and it is a weird sound always in the night. every pilot in the lot was watching now with fixed eyes and talking under his breath. nobody was calm and easy but mr. he would put his wheel down and stand on a spoke and as the steamer swung into her to me utterly invisible marks for we to be in the midst of a wide and gloomy sea he would meet and fasten her there. out of the murmur of talk one caught a coherent sentence now and then such as now the were stopped altogether and we with the current. not that i could see the boat drift for i could not the being all gone by this time. this drifting was the work; it held heart still. presently i discovered a blacker gloom than that which surrounded us. it was the head of the island. we were closing right down upon it. we its shadow and so imminent the peril that i was likely to suffocate; and i had the impulse to do something anything to save the vessel. but still mr. stood by his wheel silent intent as a cat and all the stood shoulder to shoulder at his back. the water grew shoaler and shoaler by the till it was down to eight eight we touched bottom! instantly mr. set a lot of ringing shouted through the tube now let her have it every ounce youve got! then to his partner put her hard down! snatch her! snatch her! the boat rasped and ground her way through the sand hung upon the apex of disaster a single tremendous instant and then over she went! and such a shout as went up at mr. back never loosened the roof of a pilothouse before! there was no more trouble after that. mr. was a hero that night; and it was some little time too before his exploit to be about by river men. fully to realize the marvelous precision required in laying the great steamer in her marks in that murky waste of water one should know that not only must she pick her intricate way through and blind and then shave the head of the island so closely as to brush the foliage with her stern but at one place she must pass almost within arms reach of a sunken and invisible wreck that would snatch the hull from under her if she should strike it and destroy a quarter of a million worth of steamboat and cargo in five minutes and maybe a hundred and fifty human into the bargain. the last remark i heard that night was a compliment to mr. uttered in soliloquy and with unction by one of our he said at the end of what a tedious while i had to pack my head full of bars and bends; and a curiously inanimate mass of lumber it was too. however inasmuch as i could shut my eyes and reel off a good long string of these names without leaving out more than ten miles of river in every fifty i to feel that i could take a boat down to new orleans if i could make her skip those little but of course my complacency could hardly get start enough to lift my nose a trifle into the air before mr. would think of something to fetch it down again. one day he turned on me suddenly with this settler he might as well have me my opinion of protoplasm. i reflected respectfully and then said i didnt know it had any particular shape. my gunpowdery chief went off with a bang of course and then went on loading and firing until he was out of i had learned long ago that he only carried just so many of ammunition and was sure to subside into a very placable and even remorseful old smoothbore as soon as they were all gone. that word old is merely affectionate; he was not more than i by and by he said my boy youve got to know the shape of the river perfectly. it is all there is left to steer by on a very dark night. everything else is out and gone. but mind you it the same shape in the night that it in the daytime. how do you follow a hall at home in the dark. because you know the shape of it. you cant see it. do you mean to say that got to know all the million trifling of shape in the banks of this interminable river as well as i know the shape of the front hall at home? on my honor youve got to know them better than any man ever did know the of the in his own house. you see this got to be learned; there any getting around it. a clear starlight night such heavy that if you didnt know the shape of a shore perfectly you would claw away from every bunch of timber because you would take the black shadow of it for a solid cape; and you see you would be getting scared to death every fifteen minutes by the watch. you would be fifty from shore all the time when you ought to be within fifty of it. you cant see a snag in one of those but you know exactly where it is and the shape of the river you when you are coming to it. then theres your night; the river is a very different shape on a night from what it is on a starlight night. all seem to be straight then and mighty dim too; and youd run them for straight only you know better. you boldly drive your boat right into what to be a solid straight wall you knowing very well that in reality there is a curve there and that wall falls back and way for you. then theres your gray mist. you take a night when theres one of these grisly drizzly gray and then there any particular shape to a shore. a gray mist would tangle the head of the man that ever lived. well then different of moonlight change the shape of the river in different ways. you see oh dont say any more please! have i got to learn the shape of the river according to all these five hundred thousand different ways? if i tried to carry all that cargo in my head it would make me no! you only learn the shape of the river and you learn it with such absolute certainty that you can always steer by the shape thats in your head and never mind the one thats before your eyes. very well ill try it; but after i have learned it can i depend on it. will it keep the same form and not go fooling around? before mr. could answer mr. w came in to take the watch and he said have to look out for island and all that country clear away up above the old hen and the banks are caving and the shape of the changing like everything. why you wouldnt know the point above . you can go up inside the old . it may not be necessary but still it can do no harm to explain that inside means between the snag and the shore. m.t. so that question was here were of shore changing shape. my spirits were down in the mud again. two things pretty apparent to me. one was that in order to be a pilot a man had got to learn more than any one man ought to be to know; and the other was that he must learn it all over again in a different way every hours. that night we had the watch until twelve. now it was an ancient river custom for the two to chat a bit when the watch changed. while the relieving pilot put on his and lit his cigar his partner the retiring pilot would say something like this i judge the upper bar is making down a little at point; had quarter twain with the lower lead and mark twain footnote two quarter twain is mark three is three with the other. met one abreast the head of but she was away over hugging the bar and i make her out entirely. i took her for the sunny south any forward of the and so on. and as the relieving pilot took the wheel his partner footnote partner is a technical term for the other pilot. would mention that we were in a bend and say we were abreast of a mans woodyard or plantation. this was courtesy; i supposed it was necessity. but mr. w came on watch full twelve minutes late on this particular night a tremendous breach of etiquette; in fact it is the unpardonable sin among so mr. gave him no greeting whatever but simply the wheel and out of the pilothouse without a word. i was appalled; it was a villainous night for blackness we were in a particularly wide and blind part of the river where there was no shape or substance to anything and it incredible that mr. should have left that poor fellow to kill the boat trying to find out where he was. but i resolved that i would stand by him any way. he should find that he was not wholly friendless. so i stood around and to be where we were. but mr. w on serenely through the solid firmament of black that stood for an atmosphere and never opened his mouth. here is a proud devil thought i; here is a limb of satan that would rather send us all to destruction than put himself under to me because i am not yet one of the salt of the earth and privileged to snub and lord it over everything dead and alive in a steamboat. i presently up on the bench; i did not think it was safe to go to sleep while this lunatic was on watch. however i must have gone to sleep in the course of time because the next thing i was aware of was the fact that day was breaking mr. w gone and mr. at the wheel again. so it was four oclock and all well but me; i felt like a skinful of dry bones and all of them trying to ache at once. mr. me what i had stayed up there for. i that it was to do mr. w a benevolence tell him where he was. it took five minutes for the entire preposterousness of the thing to filter into mr. system and then i judge it filled him nearly up to the chin; because he paid me a compliment and not much of a one either. he said well taking you you do seem to be more different of an ass than any creature i ever saw before. what did you suppose he wanted to know for? convenience didnt i tell you that a mans got to know the river in the night the same as know his own front hall? well i can follow the front hall in the dark if i know it is the front hall; but suppose you set me down in the middle of it in the dark and not tell me which hall it is; how am i to know? i should say so. why have you through the window and utterly ruined a hundred worth of and stuff. i was glad this damage had been saved for it would have made me unpopular with the they always hated anybody who had the name of being careless and things. i went to work now to learn the shape of the river; and of all the eluding and ungraspable that ever i tried to get mind or hands on that was the chief. i would fasten my eyes upon a sharp wooded point that projected far into the river some miles ahead of me and go to laboriously its shape upon my brain; and just as i was beginning to succeed to my satisfaction we would draw up toward it and the exasperating thing would begin to melt away and fold back into the bank! if there had been a conspicuous dead tree standing upon the very point of the cape i would find that tree inconspicuously merged into the general forest and the middle of a straight shore when i got abreast of it! no prominent hill would stick to its shape long enough for me to make up my mind what its form really was but it was as dissolving and changeful as if it had been a mountain of butter in the corner of the tropics. nothing ever had the same shape when i was coming downstream that it had borne when i went up. i these little to mr. he said thats the very main virtue of the thing. if the didnt change every three they wouldnt be of any use. take this place where we are now for instance. as long as that hill over yonder is only one hill i can boom right along the way going; but the moment it at the top and a v i know got to scratch to starboard in a hurry or ill bang this brains out against a rock; and then the moment one of the of the v behind the other got to waltz to larboard again or ill have a misunderstanding with a snag that would snatch the keelson out of this steamboat as neatly as if it were a sliver in your hand. if that hill didnt change its shape on bad nights there would be an awful steamboat graveyard around here inside of a year. it was plain that i had got to learn the shape of the river in all the different ways that could be thought of upside down wrong end first inside out and and then know what to do on gray nights when it any shape at all. so i set about it. in the course of time i to get the best of this knotty lesson and my moved to the front once more. mr. was all fixed and ready to start it to the rear again. he opened on me after this fashion how much water did we have in the middle crossing at trip before last? every trip down and up the are singing through that tangled place for of an hour on a stretch. how do you reckon i can remember such a mess as that? my boy youve got to remember it. youve got to remember the exact spot and the exact marks the boat lay in when we had the water in everyone of the five hundred shoal between st. louis and new orleans; and you mustnt get the shoal and marks of one trip mixed up with the shoal and marks of another either for theyre not often twice alike. you must keep them separate. when i get so that i can do that ill be able to raise the dead and then i wont have to pilot a steamboat to make a living. i want to retire from this business. i want a and a brush; only fit for a roustabout. i havent got brains enough to be a pilot; and if i had i wouldnt have strength enough to carry them around unless i went on now drop that! when i say ill learn footnote teach is not in the river vocabulary. a man the river i mean it. and you can depend on it ill learn him or kill him. there was no use in arguing with a person like this. i promptly put such a strain on my memory that by and by even the shoal water and the countless to stay with me. but the result was just the same. i never could more than get one knotty thing learned before another itself. now i had often seen gazing at the water and pretending to read it as if it were a book; but it was a book that told me nothing. a time came at last however when mr. to think me far enough advanced to bear a lesson on so he do you see that long slanting line on the face of the water? now thats a reef. moreover its a bluff reef. there is a solid sandbar under it that is nearly as straight up and down as the side of a house. there is plenty of water close up to it but mighty little on top of it. if you were to hit it you would knock the brains out. do you see where the line out at the upper end and to fade away? well that is a low place; that is the head of the reef. you can climb over there and not hurt anything. cross over now and follow along close under the reef easy water there not much current. i the reef along till i the fringed end. then mr. said now get ready. wait till i give the word. she wont want to mount the reef; a boat shoal water. stand by wait wait keep her well in hand. now cramp her down! snatch her! snatch her! he the other side of the wheel and to spin it around until it was hard down and then we held it so. the boat and to answer for a while and next she came surging to starboard mounted the reef and sent a long angry ridge of water foaming away from her now watch her; watch her like a cat or shell get away from you. when she strong and the tiller a little in a jerky greasy sort of way let up on her a trifle; it is the way she you at night that the water is too shoal; but keep edging her up little by little toward the point. you are well up on the bar now; there is a bar under every point because the water that comes down around it an eddy and the sediment to sink. do you see those fine on the face of the water that branch out like the of a fan. well those are little you want to just miss the of them but run them pretty close. now look out look out! dont you crowd that slick place; there aint nine there; she wont stand it. she to smell it; look sharp i tell you! oh there you go! stop the starboard wheel! quick! ship up to back! set her back! the engine jingled and the promptly shooting white of steam far aloft out of the scape but it was too late. the boat had smelt the bar in good earnest; the foamy that radiated from her suddenly a great dead swell came rolling forward and swept ahead of her she far over to larboard and went tearing away toward the other shore as if she were about scared to death. we were a good mile from where we ought to have been when we finally got the upper hand of her again. during the afternoon watch the next day mr. me if i knew how to run the next few miles. i said go inside the first snag above the point outside the next one start out from the lower end of woodyard make a square crossing and but he wasnt. he was still below when i rounded it and upon a piece of river which i had some about. i did not know that he was hiding behind a chimney to see how i would perform. i went gaily along getting and for he had never left the boat in my sole charge such a length of time before. i even got to setting her and letting the wheel go entirely while i vaingloriously turned my back and the stem marks and a tune a sort of easy indifference which i had prodigiously admired in and other great once i rather long and when i faced to the front again my heart flew into my mouth so suddenly that if i clapped my teeth together i should have lost it. one of those frightful bluff was stretching its deadly length right across our my head was gone in a moment; i did not know which end i stood on; i and could not get my breath; i spun the wheel down with such rapidity that it wove itself together like a web; the boat and turned square away from the reef but the reef her! i fled and still it still it kept right across my i never to see where i was going i only fled. the awful crash was imminent why didnt that villain come! if i committed the crime of ringing a bell i might get thrown overboard. but better that than kill the boat. so in blind desperation i such a rattling shivaree down below as never had astounded an engineer in this world before i fancy. amidst the frenzy of the the to back and fill in a furious way and my reason its throne we were about to crash into the woods on the other side of the river. just then mr. stepped calmly into view on the hurricane deck. my soul went out to him in gratitude. my distress vanished; i would have felt safe on the brink of niagara with mr. on the hurricane deck. he blandly and sweetly took his toothpick out of his mouth between his as if it were a cigar we were just in the act of climbing an big tree and the were scudding astern like and lifted up these to me ever so gently the boat pressed her nose among the a critical instant then reluctantly to back away. stop the larboard. come ahead on it. stop the starboard. come ahead on it. point her for the bar. i sailed away as serenely as a morning. mr. came in and said with mock simplicity when you have a hail my boy you ought to tap the big bell three times before you land so that the can get ready. ah! then it was for wood i suppose. the officer of the watch will tell you when he to wood up. indeed? why what could you want over here in the bend then? did you ever know of a boat following a bend upstream at this stage of the river? no sir and i wasnt trying to follow it. i was getting away from a bluff reef. no it wasnt a bluff reef; there one within three miles of where you were. all right; i am taking the responsibility. i was just as anxious to kill the boat now as i had been to save her before. i impressed my upon my memory to be used at the inquest and made a straight break for the reef. as it under our i held my breath; but we slid over it like oil. now dont you see the difference? it wasnt anything but a wind reef. the wind does that. so i see. but it is exactly like a bluff reef. how am i ever going to tell them apart? i cant tell you. it is an instinct. by and by you will just naturally know one from the other but you never will be able to explain why or how you know them apart it turned out to be true. the face of the water in time a wonderful book a book that was a dead language to the uneducated passenger but which told its mind to me without reserve its most cherished as clearly as if it uttered them with a voice. and it was not a book to be read once and thrown aside for it had a new story to tell every day. throughout the long twelve hundred miles there was never a page that was void of interest never one that you could leave unread without loss never one that you would want to skip thinking you could find higher enjoyment in some other thing. there never was so wonderful a book written by man; never one whose interest was so absorbing so unflagging so renewed with every reperusal. the passenger who could not read it was charmed with a peculiar sort of faint dimple on its surface on the rare occasions when he did not overlook it altogether; but to the pilot that was an passage; indeed it was more than that it was a legend of the with a string of shouting exclamation at the end of it; for it meant that a wreck or a rock was buried there that could tear the life out of the vessel that ever it is the and expression the water ever and the most hideous to a eye. in truth the passenger who could not read this book saw nothing but all manner of pretty in it painted by the sun and shaded by the whereas to the trained eye these were not at all but the and most of now when i had mastered the language of this water and had come to know every trifling feature that bordered the great river as familiarly as i knew the letters of the alphabet i had made a valuable acquisition. but i had lost something too. i had lost something which could never be to me while i lived. all the grace the beauty the poetry had gone out of the majestic river! i still keep in mind a certain wonderful sunset which i when steamboating was new to me. a broad expanse of the river was turned to blood; in the middle distance the red hue into gold through which a solitary log came floating black and conspicuous; in one place a long slanting mark lay sparkling upon the water; in another the surface was broken by boiling tumbling rings that were as as an opal; where the ruddy flush was was a smooth spot that was covered with graceful and radiating ever so delicately the shore on our left was densely wooded and the somber shadow that fell from this forest was broken in one place by a long ruffled trail that shone like silver; and high above the forest wall a dead tree waved a single leafy bough that like a flame in the unobstructed splendor that was flowing from the sun. there were graceful reflected woody heights soft and over the whole scene far and near the dissolving steadily enriching it every passing moment with new of coloring. i stood like one bewitched. i drank it in in a speechless rapture. the world was new to me and i had never seen anything like this at home. but as i have said a day came when i to cease from the and the which the moon and the sun and the twilight wrought upon the face; another day came when i altogether to note them. then if that sunset scene had been repeated i should have upon it without rapture and should have upon it inwardly after this fashion: this sun means that we are going to have wind tomorrow; that floating log means that the river is rising small thanks to it; that slanting mark on the water to a bluff reef which is going to kill steamboat one of these nights if it on stretching out like that; those tumbling show a dissolving bar and a changing channel there; the and in the slick water over yonder are a warning that that troublesome place is up dangerously; that silver streak in the shadow of the forest is the break from a new snag and he located himself in the very best place he could have found to fish for that tall dead tree with a single living branch is not going to last long and then how is a body ever going to get through this blind place at night without the friendly old landmark. no the romance and the beauty were all gone from the river. all the value any feature of it had for me now was the amount of usefulness it could furnish toward compassing the safe piloting of a steamboat. since those days i have from my heart. what does the lovely flush in a cheek mean to a doctor but a break that above some deadly disease. are not all her visible sown thick with what are to him the and of hidden decay? does he ever see her beauty at all or doesnt he simply view her professionally and comment upon her unwholesome condition all to himself? and doesnt he sometimes wonder whether he most or lost most by learning his trade? done me the courtesy to read my which have this may possibly wonder that i deal so minutely with piloting as a science. it was the prime purpose of those and i am not quite done yet. i wish to show in the most patient and painstaking way what a wonderful science it is. ship channels are and lighted and therefore it is a comparatively easy undertaking to learn to run them; with gravel change their channels very gradually and therefore one needs to learn them but once; but piloting becomes another matter when you apply it to vast like the mississippi and the missouri whose alluvial banks cave and change constantly whose are always hunting up new quarters whose are never at rest whose channels are for ever dodging and shirking and whose must be in all nights and all without the aid of a single lighthouse or a single buoy; for there is neither light nor buoy to be found anywhere in all this three or four thousand miles of villainous true at the time to; not true now . i feel justified in enlarging upon this great science for the reason that i feel sure no one ever yet written a paragraph about it who had a steamboat himself and so had a practical knowledge of the subject. if the theme were hackneyed i should be obliged to deal gently with the reader; but since it is wholly new i have felt at liberty to take up a considerable degree of room with it. when i had learned the name and position of every visible feature of the river; when i had so mastered its shape that i could shut my eyes and trace it from st. louis to new orleans; when i had learned to read the face of the water as one would cull the news from the morning paper; and finally when i had trained my dull memory to treasure up an endless array of and and keep fast hold of them i that my education was complete: so i got to tilting my cap to the side of my head and wearing a toothpick in my mouth at the wheel. mr. had his eye on these airs. one day he said i took the glass and presently said i cant tell. i suppose that that bank is about a foot and a half high. foot and a half! thats a bank. how high was the bank along here last trip? because have to know a good many things that it you. for one thing it you the stage of the river you whether theres more water or less in the river along here than there was last trip. the leads tell me that. i rather thought i had the advantage of him there. yes but suppose the leads lie? the bank would tell you so and then youd stir those up a bit. there was a bank here last trip and there is only a bank now. what does that signify? i guess i am right sir. yonder is some driftwood floating down the stream. a rise the driftwood but then it on floating a while after the river is done rising. now the bank will tell you about this. wait till you come to a place where it a little. now here; do you see this narrow belt of fine sediment that was while the water was higher. you see the driftwood to strand too. the bank in other ways. do you see that stump on the false point? well the water is just up to the roots of it. you must make a note of that. thats where the benefit of the bank comes in. there is water enough in now yet there may not be by the time we get there; but the bank will keep us posted all along. you dont run close on a falling river upstream and there are precious few of them that you are to run at all downstream. theres a law of the united against it. the river may be rising by the time we get to and in that case well run it. we are drawing how much? but what i particularly want to know is if i have got to keep up an everlasting measuring of the banks of this river twelve hundred miles month in and month out? i should say so. i fancy we shant run any of the river this trip as youve ever seen it run before so to speak. if the river to rise again well go up behind bars that youve always seen standing out of the river high and dry like the roof of a house; well cut across low that youve never noticed at all right through the middle of bars that cover three hundred acres of river; well creep through where youve always thought was solid land; well dart through the woods and leave miles of river off to one side; well see the of every island between new orleans and cairo. then got to go to work and learn just as much more river as i already know. well one to find out. i think i was a fool when i went into this business. yes that is true. and you are yet. but not be when youve learned it. have i got to learn all this thing just as i know the rest of the river and all and so i can run it at night? yes. and youve got to have good fair marks from one end of the river to the other that will help the bank tell you when there is water enough in each of these countless like that stump you know. when the river first to rise you can run half a dozen of the of them; when it a foot more you can run another dozen; the next foot will add a couple of dozen and so on: so you see you have to know your banks and marks to a dead moral certainty and never get them mixed; for when you start through one of those theres no backing out again as there is in the big river; youve got to go through or stay there six if you get caught on a falling river. there are about fifty of these which you cant run at all except when the river is brim full and over the banks. cheerful enough. and mind what just told you; when you start into one of those youve got to go through. they are too narrow to turn around in too crooked to back out of and the shoal water is always up at the head; never elsewhere. and the head of them is always likely to be filling up little by little so that the marks you reckon their depth by this season may not answer for next. exactly. cramp her up to the bar! what are you standing up through the middle of the river for? the next few me strange things. on the same day that we held the conversation above we met a great rise coming down the river. the whole vast face of the stream was black with drifting dead broken and great that had in and been washed away. it required the steering to pick way through this rushing raft even in the daytime when crossing from point to point; and at night the difficulty was mightily increased; every now and then a huge log lying deep in the water would suddenly appear right under our coming no use to try to avoid it then; we could only stop the and one wheel would walk over that log from one end to the other keeping up a thundering racket and the boat in a way that was very uncomfortable to now and then we would hit one of these sunken a rattling bang dead in the center with a full head of steam and it would stun the boat as if she had hit a continent. sometimes this log would lodge and stay right across our nose and back the mississippi up before it; we would have to do a little then to get away from the obstruction. we often hit white in the dark for we could not see them till we were right on them; but a black log is a pretty distinct object at night. a white snag is an ugly customer when the daylight is gone. of course on the great rise down came a swarm of prodigious from the head waters of the mississippi coal from pittsburgh little trading from everywhere and from posey county indiana with fruit and furniture the usual term for it though in plain english the freight thus was and bore a mortal hatred to these craft; and it was returned with usury. the law required all such helpless to keep a light burning but it was a law that was often broken. all of a sudden on a murky night a light would hop up right under our almost and an agonized voice with the backwoods whang to it would wail out the you to! you see you son of a stuffed monkey! then for an instant as we by the red glare from our would reveal the scow and the form of the gesticulating orator as if under a and in that instant our and would send and receive a tempest of and profanity one of our would walk off with the crashing of a and down the dead blackness would shut again. and that would be sure to go into new orleans and sue our boat swearing stoutly that he had a light burning all the time when in truth his gang had the lantern down below to sing and lie and drink and gamble by and no watch on deck. once at night in one of those behind an island which intensely describe with the phrase as dark as the inside of a cow we should have eaten up a posey county family fruit furniture and all but that they to be fiddling down below and we just caught the sound of the music in time to sheer off doing no serious damage unfortunately but coming so near it that we had good for a moment. these people brought up their lantern then of course; and as we backed and filled to get away the precious family stood in the light of it both and various and cursed us till everything turned blue. once a sent a bullet through our pilothouse when we a steering oar of him in a very narrow place. during this big rise these craft were an intolerable nuisance. we were running chute after chute a new world to me and if there was a particularly cramped place in a chute we would be pretty sure to meet a broadhorn there; and if he to be there we would find him in a still worse locality namely the head of the chute on the shoal water. and then there would be no end of profane exchanged. sometimes in the big river when we would be feeling our way cautiously along through a fog the deep hush would suddenly be broken by and a clamor of tin and all in instant a log raft would appear vaguely through the webby veil close upon us; and then we did not wait to swap but snatched our engine out by the roots and piled on all the steam we had to scramble out of the way! one doesnt hit a rock or a solid log craft with a steamboat when he can get excused. you will hardly believe it but many steamboat always carried a large assortment of religious with them in those old departed steamboating days. indeed they did. twenty times a day we would be cramping up around a bar while a string of these were drifting down into the head of the bend away above and beyond us a couple of miles. now a skiff would dart away from one of them and come fighting its laborious way across the desert of water. it would ease all in the shadow of our forecastle and the panting would shout a as the skiff swiftly astern. the clerk would throw over a file of new orleans if these were picked up without comment you might notice that now a dozen other had been drifting down upon us without saying anything. you understand they had been waiting to see how no. was going to fare. no. making no comment all the rest would bend to their and come on now; and as fast as they came the clerk would heave over neat of religious tied to shingles. the amount of hard swearing which twelve of religious literature will command when impartially divided up among twelve who have a heavy skiff two miles on a hot day to get them is simply incredible. as i have said the big rise brought a new world under my vision. by the time the river was over its banks we had forsaken our old and were hourly climbing over bars that had stood ten out of water before; we were shaving stumpy like that at the foot of madrid bend which i had always seen before; we were through like that of where the opening at the foot was an unbroken wall of timber till our nose was almost at the very spot. some of these were utter the dense untouched forest overhung both banks of the crooked little crack and one could believe that human had never there before. the swinging the grassy and as we swept by the flowering waving their red from the tops of dead trunks and all the spendthrift richness of the forest foliage were wasted and thrown away there. the were lovely to steer in; they were deep except at the head; the current was gentle; under the the water was absolutely dead and the invisible banks so bluff that where the tender willow projected you could bury your broadside in them as you tore along and then you fairly to fly. behind other we found wretched little and little there were crazy rail sticking a foot or two above the water with one or two male on the toprail on in hands grinding tobacco and discharging the result at floating chips through left by lost teeth; while the rest of the family and the few were huddled together in an empty riding at her close at hand. in this flatboat the family would have to cook and eat and sleep for a lesser or greater number of days or possibly until the river should fall two or three and let them get back to their and their again being a merciful provision of an providence to enable them to take exercise without exertion. and this sort of watery camping out was a thing which these people were rather liable to be treated to a couple of times a year: by the december rise out of the ohio and the june rise out of the mississippi. and yet these were kindly for they at least the poor things to rise from the dead now and then and look upon life when a steamboat went by. they appreciated the blessing too for they spread their and eyes wide open and made the most of these occasions. now what could these find to do to keep from dying of the blues during the season! once in one of these lovely island we found our course completely bridged by a great fallen tree. this will serve to show how narrow some of the were. the had an hours recreation in a virgin wilderness while the chopped the bridge away; for there was no such thing as turning back you comprehend. from cairo to baton rouge when the river is over its banks you have no particular trouble in the night for the wall of dense forest that the two banks all the way is only with a farm or woodyard opening at and so you cant get out of the river much easier than you could get out of a lane; but from baton rouge to new orleans it is a different matter. the river is more than a mile wide and very deep as much as two hundred in both banks for a good deal over a hundred miles are shorn of their timber and bordered by continuous sugar with only here and there a scattering sapling or row of ornamental the timber is shorn off clear to the rear of the from two to four miles. when the first frost to come the snatch off their in a hurry. when they have finished grinding the cane they form the refuse of the which they call bagasse into great piles and set fire to them though in other sugar the bagasse is used for fuel in the of the sugar mills. now the piles of damp bagasse burn slowly and smoke like own kitchen. an embankment ten or fifteen high both banks of the mississippi all the way down that lower end of the river and this embankment is set back from the edge of the shore from ten to perhaps a hundred according to circumstances; say thirty or forty as a general thing. fill that whole region with an impenetrable gloom of smoke from a hundred miles of burning bagasse piles when the river is over the banks and turn a steamboat loose along there at midnight and see how she will feel. and see how you will feel too! you find yourself away out in the midst of a vague dim sea that is shoreless that out and itself in the murky for you cannot discern the thin rib of embankment and you are always you see a straggling tree when you dont. the themselves are transformed by the smoke and look like a part of the sea. all through your watch you are tortured with the exquisite misery of uncertainty. you hope you are keeping in the river but you do not know. all that you are sure about is that you are likely to be within six of the bank and destruction when you think you are a good from shore. and you are sure also that if you chance suddenly to fetch up against the embankment and topple your overboard you will have the small comfort of knowing that it is about what you were to do. one of the great vicksburg out into a sugar plantation one night at such a time and had to stay there a week. but there was no novelty about it; it had often been done before. i thought i had finished this chapter but i wish to add a curious thing while it is in my mind. it is only relevant in that it is connected with piloting. there used to be an excellent pilot on the river a mr. x. who was a somnambulist. it was said that if his mind was troubled about a bad piece of river he was pretty sure to get up and walk in his sleep and do strange things. he was once for a trip or two with george on a great new orleans passenger packet. during a considerable part of the first trip george was uneasy but got over it by and by as x. content to stay in his bed when asleep. late one night the boat was approaching helena arkansas; the water was low and the crossing above the town in a very blind and tangled condition. x. had seen the crossing since had and as the night was particularly drizzly sullen and dark was considering whether he had not better have x. to assist in running the place when the door opened and x. in. now on very dark nights light is a deadly enemy to piloting; you are aware that if you stand in a lighted room on such a night you cannot see things in the street to any purpose; but if you put out the and stand in the gloom you can make out in the street pretty well. so on very dark nights do not smoke; they allow no fire in the pilothouse stove if there is a crack which can allow the least ray to escape; they order the to be curtained with huge and the to be closely blinded. then no light whatever from the boat. the undefinable shape that now the pilothouse had mr. voice. this said let me take her george; seen this place since you have and it is so crooked that i reckon i can run it myself easier than i could tell you how to do it. it is kind of you and i swear i am willing. i havent got another drop of perspiration left in me. i have been spinning around and around the wheel like a squirrel. it is so dark i cant tell which way she is swinging till she is coming around like a whirligig. so took a seat on the bench panting and breathless. the black phantom assumed the wheel without saying anything steadied the steamer with a turn or two and then stood at ease coaxing her a little to this side and then to that as gently and as sweetly as if the time had been noonday. when observed this marvel of steering he wished he had not he and and finally said well i thought i knew how to steer a steamboat but that was another mistake of mine. x. said nothing but went serenely on with his work. he rang for the leads; he rang to slow down the steam; he worked the boat carefully and neatly into invisible marks then stood at the center of the wheel and blandly out into the blackness fore and aft to verify his position; as the leads more and more he stopped the entirely and the dead silence and suspense of drifting when the water was struck he cracked on the steam carried her handsomely over and then to work her warily into the next system of shoal marks; the same patient heedful use of leads and the boat slipped through without touching bottom and upon the third and last intricacy of the crossing; imperceptibly she moved through the gloom crept by into her marks tediously till the water was cried and then under a tremendous head of steam went swinging over the reef and away into deep water and safety! let his breath pour out in a great relieving sigh and said thats the piece of piloting that was ever done on the mississippi river! i wouldnt it could be done if i seen it. just hold her five minutes longer partner and let me run down and get a cup of coffee. a minute later was biting into a pie down in the texas and comforting himself with coffee. just then the night watchman in and was about to happen out again when he noticed and the next moment both men were flying up the pilothouse companion way three steps at a jump! nobody there! the great steamer was whistling down the middle of the river at her own sweet will! the watchman shot out of the place again; the wheel set an engine back with power and held his breath while the boat reluctantly swung away from a towhead which she was about to knock into the middle of the gulf of mexico! didnt that lunatic tell you he was asleep when he first came up here? well he was. i found him walking along on top of the just as unconcerned as another man would walk a pavement; and i put him to bed; now just this minute there he was again away astern going through that sort of tightrope deviltry the same as before. well i think ill stay by next time he one of those but i hope hell have them often. you just ought to have seen him take this boat through helena crossing. i never saw anything so gaudy before. and if he can do such piloting when he is sound asleep what he do if he was dead! when the river is very low and steamboat is drawing all the water there is in the channel or a few more as was often the case in the old times one must be painfully circumspect in his piloting. we used to have to sound a number of particularly bad almost every trip when the river was at a very low stage. sounding is done in this way. the boat up at the shore just above the shoal crossing; the pilot not on watch his cub or steersman and a picked crew of men sometimes an officer also and goes out in the yawl provided the boat not that rare and sumptuous luxury a and proceeds to hunt for the best water the pilot on duty watching his through a spyglass meantime and in some by of the whistle try higher up or try lower down; for the surface of the water like an is more expressive and intelligible when from a little distance than very close at hand. the whistle are seldom necessary however; never perhaps except when the wind the significant upon the waters surface. when the yawl the shoal place the speed is the pilot to sound the depth with a pole ten or twelve long and the steersman at the tiller the order to hold her up to starboard; or let her fall off to the term larboard is never used at sea now to signify the left hand; but was always used on the river in my time or steady steady as you go. when the indicate that the yawl is approaching the part of the reef the command is given to ease all! then the men stop rowing and the yawl with the current. the next order is stand by with the buoy! the moment the point is the pilot the order let go the buoy! and over she goes. if the pilot is not satisfied he the place again; if he better water higher up or lower down he the buoy to that place. being finally satisfied he the order and all the men stand their straight up in the air in line; a blast from the whistle that the signal been seen; then the men give way on their and lay the yawl alongside the buoy; the steamer comes creeping carefully down is pointed straight at the buoy her power for the coming struggle and presently at the critical moment turns on all her steam and goes grinding and over the buoy and the sand and gains the deep water beyond. or maybe she doesnt; maybe she and then she to while away several hours or days sparring herself off. sometimes a buoy is not laid at all but the yawl goes ahead hunting the best water and the steamer along in its wake. often there is a deal of fun and excitement about sounding especially if it is a glorious summer day or a blustering night. but in winter the cold and the peril take most of the fun out of it. a buoy is nothing but a board four or five long with one end turned up; it is a reversed schoolhouse bench with one of the left and the other removed. it is anchored on the part of the reef by a rope with a heavy stone made fast to the end of it. but for the resistance of the end of the reversed bench the current would pull the buoy under water. at night a paper lantern with a candle in it is fastened on top of the buoy and this can be seen a mile or more a little glimmering spark in the waste of blackness. nothing a cub so much as an opportunity to go out sounding. there is such an air of adventure about it; often there is danger; it is so gaudy and to sit up in the and steer a swift yawl; there is something fine about the exultant spring of the boat when an experienced old sailor crew throw their into the it is lovely to see the white foam stream away from the there is music in the rush of the water; it is deliciously exhilarating in summer to go speeding over the breezy of the river when the world of is dancing in the sun. it is such grandeur too to the cub to get a chance to give an order; for often the pilot will simply say let her go about! and leave the rest to the cub who instantly in his tone of command ease starboard! strong on the larboard! starboard give way! with a will men! the cub sounding for the further reason that the eyes of the are watching all the with absorbing interest if the time be daylight; and if it be night he that those same wondering eyes are fastened upon the lantern as it out into the gloom and away in the remote distance. one trip a pretty girl of sixteen spent her time in our pilothouse with her uncle and aunt every day and all day long. i fell in love with her. so did mr. cub tom g . tom and i had been bosom until this time; but now a coolness to arise. i told the girl a good many of my river and made myself out a good deal of a hero; tom tried to make himself appear to be a hero too and to some extent but then he always had a way of however virtue is its own reward so i was a barely perceptible trifle ahead in the contest. about this time something which handsomely for me: the decided to sound the crossing at the head of . this would occur about nine or ten oclock at night when the would be still up; it would be mr. watch therefore my chief would have to do the sounding. we had a perfect love of a long trim graceful and as fleet as a greyhound; her were cushioned; she carried twelve one of the mates was always sent in her to transmit to her crew for ours was a steamer where no end of style was put on. we tied up at the shore above and got ready. it was a foul night and the river was so wide there that a uneducated eyes could discern no opposite shore through such a gloom. the were alert and interested; everything was satisfactory. as i hurried through the picturesquely gotten up in storm toggery i met tom and could not forbear myself of a mean speech now just for that you can go and get the yourself. i was going after it but id see you in halifax now before id do it. it aint either. its been and its been up on the ladies cabin two days drying. i flew back and shortly among the crowd of watching and wondering ladies just in time to hear the command: i over and there was the gallant booming away the unprincipled tom at the tiller and my chief sitting by him with the which i had been sent on a errand to fetch. then that young girl said to me oh how awful to have to go out in that little boat on such a night! do you think there is any danger? i would rather have been i went off full of venom to help in the pilothouse. by and by the lantern and after an interval a wee spark upon the face of the water a mile away. mr. the whistle in acknowledgment backed the steamer out and made for it. we flew along for a while then steam and went cautiously gliding toward the spark. presently mr. so he came ahead on the once more and rang for the leads. gradually the water up and then to deepen again! mr. well i dont understand this. i believe that buoy off the reef. to be a little too far to the left. no matter it is to run over it anyhow. so in that solid world of darkness we went creeping down on the light. just as our were in the act of plowing over it mr. the rang a startling peal and a sudden chorus of wild burst out far below a pause and then the sound of grinding and crashing mr. there! the paddlewheel ground the to lucifer run! see who is i was on the main deck in the twinkling of an eye. my chief and the third mate and nearly all the men were safe. they had discovered their danger when it was too late to pull out of the way; then when the great them a moment later they were prepared and knew what to do; at my order they sprang at the right instant the guard and were aboard. the next moment the swept aft to the wheel and was struck and to two of the men and the cub tom were missing a fact which spread like wildfire over the boat. the came flocking to the forward gangway ladies and all and in awed of the dreadful thing. and often and again i heard them say poor poor boy poor boy! by this time the yawl was manned and away to search for the missing. now a faint call was heard off to the left. the yawl had in the other direction. half the people rushed to one side to encourage the swimmer with their the other half rushed the other way to shriek to the yawl to turn about. by the the swimmer was approaching but some said the sound failing strength. the crowd themselves against the leaning over and staring into the gloom; and every faint and fainter cry wrung from them such words as ah poor fellow poor fellow! is there no way to save him? but still the held out and drew nearer and presently the voice said pluckily what a rousing cheer they gave him! the chief mate took his stand in the glare of a a coil of rope in his hand and his men grouped about him. the next moment the face in the circle of light and in another one the owner of it was aboard limp and drenched while cheer on cheer went up. it was that devil tom. the yawl crew everywhere but found no sign of the two men. they probably to catch the guard tumbled back and were struck by the wheel and tom had never for the guard at all but had headfirst into the river and under the wheel. it was nothing; i could have done it easy enough and i said so; but everybody went on just the same making a wonderful to do over that ass as if he had done something great. that girl seem to have enough of that pitiful hero the rest of the trip; but little i i her any way. the way we came to mistake the lantern for the was this. my chief said that after laying the buoy he fell away and watched it till it to be secure; then he took up a position a hundred below it and a little to one side of the course headed the upstream and to wait some time he and the officer got to talking; he up when he that the steamer was about on the reef; saw that the buoy was gone but supposed that the steamer had already run over it; he went on with his talk; he noticed that the steamer was getting very close on him but that was the correct thing; it was her business to shave him closely for convenience in taking him aboard; he was her to sheer off until the last moment; then it upon him that she was trying to run him down mistaking his lantern for the so he sang out stand by to spring for the guard men! and the next instant the jump was made. but i am wandering from what i was intending to do that is make plainer than perhaps in the previous some of the peculiar of the science of piloting. first of all there is one faculty which a pilot must incessantly cultivate until he brought it to absolute perfection. nothing short of perfection will do. that faculty is memory. he cannot stop with merely thinking a thing is so and so; he must know it; for this is eminently one of the exact with what scorn a pilot was upon in the old times if he ever to deal in that feeble phrase i think instead of the vigorous one i know! one cannot easily realize what a tremendous thing it is to know every trivial detail of twelve hundred miles of river and know it with absolute exactness. if you will take the longest street in new york and travel up and down it conning its patiently until you know every house and window and door and lamppost and big and little sign by heart and know them so accurately that you can instantly name the one you are abreast of when you are set down at random in that street in the middle of an inky black night you will then have a tolerable notion of the amount and the exactness of a knowledge who the mississippi river in his head. and then if you will go on until you know every street crossing the character size and position of the and the varying depth of mud in each of those numberless you will have some idea of what the pilot must know in order to keep a mississippi steamer out of trouble. next if you will take half of the in that long street and change their once a month and still manage to know their new accurately on dark nights and keep up with these repeated without making any you will understand what is required of a peerless memory by the fickle mississippi. i think a memory is about the most wonderful thing in the world. to know the old and new by heart and be able to recite them glibly forward or backward or begin at random anywhere in the book and recite both ways and never trip or make a mistake is no extravagant mass of knowledge and no marvelous facility to a knowledge of the mississippi and his marvelous facility in the handling of it. i make this comparison deliberately and believe i am not expanding the truth when i do it. many will think my figure too strong but will not. and how easily and comfortably the memory does its work; how placidly effortless is its way; how unconsciously it up its vast hour by hour day by day and never or a single valuable package of them all! take an instance. let a leadsman cry half twain! half twain! half twain! half twain! half twain! until it become as monotonous as the ticking of a clock; let conversation be going on all the time and the pilot be doing his share of the talking and no longer consciously listening to the leadsman; and in the midst of this endless string of half let a single quarter twain! be without emphasis and then the half twain cry go on again just as before: two or three later that pilot can describe with precision the position in the river when that quarter twain was uttered and give you such a lot of and to guide you that you ought to be able to take the boat there and put her in that same spot again yourself! the cry of quarter twain did not really take his mind from his talk but his trained instantly the noted the change of depth and laid up the important details for future reference without any assistance from him in the matter. if you were walking and talking with a friend and another friend at your side kept up a monotonous repetition of the vowel sound a for a couple of and then in the midst an r thus a a a a a r a a a and gave the r no emphasis you would not be able to state two or three afterward that the r had been put in nor be able to tell what you were passing at the moment it was done. but you could if your memory had been patiently and laboriously trained to do that sort of thing mechanically. give a man a tolerably fair memory to start with and piloting will develop it into a very colossus of capability. but only in the it is daily drilled in. a time would come when the mans could not help and and his memory could not help holding on to them with the grip of a vise; but if you that same man at noon what he had had for breakfast it would be ten to one that he could not tell you. astonishing things can be done with the human memory if you will devote it faithfully to one particular line of business. at the time that wages so high on the missouri river my chief mr. went up there and learned more than a thousand miles of that stream with an ease and rapidity that were astonishing. when he had seen each division once in the daytime and once at night his education was so nearly complete that he took out a daylight license; a few later he took out a full license and went to piloting day and night and he ranked a too. mr. placed me as steersman for a while under a pilot whose of memory were a constant marvel to me. however his memory was born in him i think not built. for instance somebody would mention a name. instantly mr. brown would break in oh i knew him. redheaded fellow with a little scar on the side of his throat like a splinter under the flesh. he was only in the southern trade six that was thirteen years ago. i made a trip with him. there was five in the upper river then; the henry blake grounded at the foot of tower island drawing four and a half; the george elliott unshipped her rudder on the wreck of the sunflower i know when she sunk; it was three years before that on the nd of december; asa hardy was captain of her and his brother john was first clerk; and it was his first trip in her too; tom jones told me these things a week afterward in new orleans; he was first mate of the sunflower. captain hardy stuck a nail in his foot the th of july of the next year and of the lockjaw on the th. his brother two years after of march erysipelas. i never saw either of the they were river men but people who knew them told me all these things. and they said captain hardy wore yarn winter and summer just the same and his first name was jane shook she was from new england and his second one in a lunatic asylum. it was in the blood. she was from lexington kentucky. name was before she was married. and so on by the hour the mans tongue would go. he could not forget any thing. it was simply impossible. the most trivial details as distinct and luminous in his head after they had lain there for years as the most memorable his was not simply a memory; its grasp was universal. if he were talking about a trifling letter he had received seven years before he was pretty sure to deliver you the entire screed from memory. and then without observing that he was from the true line of his talk he was more than likely to hurl in a parenthetical biography of the writer of that letter; and you were lucky indeed if he did not take up that one by one and give you their too. such a memory as that is a great misfortune. to it all are of the same size. its possessor cannot distinguish an interesting circumstance from an uninteresting one. as a talker he is bound to clog his narrative with tiresome details and make himself an insufferable bore. moreover he cannot stick to his subject. he up every little grain of memory he in his way and so is led aside. mr. brown would start out with the honest intention of telling you a vastly funny anecdote about a dog. he would be so full of laugh that he could hardly begin; then his memory would start with the dogs breed and personal appearance; drift into a history of his owner; of his family with of and that had in it together with of congratulatory and obituary poetry provoked by the same: then this memory would recollect that one of these during the celebrated hard winter of such and such a year and a minute description of that winter would follow along with the names of people who were frozen to death and statistics showing the high which pork and hay went up to. pork and hay would suggest corn and fodder; corn and fodder would suggest cows and cows and would suggest the circus and certain celebrated bareback the transition from the circus to the menagerie was easy and natural; from the elephant to equatorial africa was but a step; then of course the heathen would suggest religion; and at the end of three or four hours tedious jaw the watch would change and brown would go out of the pilothouse muttering from he had heard years before about the efficacy of prayer as a means of grace. and the original first mention would be all you had learned about that dog after all this waiting and a pilot must have a memory; but there are two higher which he must also have. he must have good and quick judgment and decision and a cool calm courage that no peril can shake. give a man the trifle of pluck to start with and by the time he become a pilot he cannot be unmanned by any danger a steamboat can get into; but one cannot quite say the same for judgment. judgment is a matter of brains and a man must start with a good stock of that article or he will never succeed as a pilot. the growth of courage in the pilothouse is steady all the time but it does not reach a high and satisfactory condition until some time after the young pilot been standing his own watch alone and under the staggering weight of all the connected with the position. when an apprentice become pretty thoroughly acquainted with the river he goes along so fearlessly with his steamboat night or day that he presently to imagine that it is his courage that him; but the first time the pilot steps out and leaves him to his own devices he out it was the other mans. he that the article been left out of his own cargo altogether. the whole river is with in a moment; he is not prepared for them; he does not know how to meet them; all his knowledge him; and within fifteen minutes he is as white as a sheet and scared almost to death. therefore wisely train these by various strategic to look danger in the face a little more calmly. a favorite way of theirs is to play a friendly swindle upon the candidate. mr. me in this fashion once and for years afterward i used to blush even in my sleep when i thought of it. i had become a good steersman; so good indeed that i had all the work to do on our watch night and day; mr. seldom made a suggestion to me; all he ever did was to take the wheel on particularly bad nights or in particularly bad land the boat when she needed to be landed play gentleman of leisure of the watch and collect the wages. the lower river was about bankfull and if anybody had my ability to run any crossing between cairo and new orleans without help or instruction i should have felt irreparably hurt. the idea of being afraid of any crossing in the lot in the daytime was a thing too preposterous for contemplation. well one matchless day i was bowling down the bend above island brimful of and carrying my nose as high as a when mr. said this was almost an affront. it was about the and crossing in the whole river. one come to any harm whether he ran it right or not; and as for depth there never had been any bottom there. i knew all this perfectly well. well that is an odd question. i get bottom there with a church steeple. the very tone of the question shook my confidence. that was what mr. was he left without saying anything more. i to imagine all of things. mr. unknown to me of course sent somebody down to the forecastle with some mysterious instructions to the another messenger was sent to whisper among the and then mr. went into hiding behind a smokestack where he could observe presently the captain stepped out on the hurricane deck; next the chief mate then a clerk. every moment or two a straggler was added to my audience; and before i got to the head of the island i had fifteen or twenty people down there under my nose. i to wonder what the trouble was. as i across the captain aloft at me and said with a sham uneasiness in his voice but that did the business for me. my imagination to construct out of nothing and they multiplied faster than i could keep the run of them. all at once i i saw shoal water ahead! the wave of coward agony that through me then came near every joint in me. all my confidence in that crossing vanished. i the it ashamed; it again; it once more; it tremblingly one again and it so feebly that i could hardly hear the stroke myself. captain and mate sang out instantly and both together this was another shock. i to climb the wheel like a squirrel; but i would hardly get the boat to port before i would see new on that side and away i would spin to the other; only to find to starboard and be crazy to get to port again. then came the sepulchral cry deep four in a bottomless crossing! the terror of it took my breath away. i was helpless. i did not know what in the world to do. i was quaking from head to foot and i could have hung my hat on my eyes they stuck out so far. we were drawing nine! my hands were in a nerveless flutter. i could not ring a bell intelligibly with them. i flew to the and shouted to the engineer oh ben if you love me back her! quick ben! oh back the immortal soul out of her! i heard the door close gently. i around and there stood mr. smiling a bland sweet smile. then the audience on the hurricane deck sent up a of humiliating laughter. i saw it all now and i felt meaner than the man in human history. i laid in the lead set the boat in her marks came ahead on the and said it was a fine trick to play on an orphan wasnt it? i suppose ill never hear the last of how i was ass enough to heave the lead at the head of . well no you wont maybe. in fact i hope you wont; for i want you to learn something by that experience. didnt you know there was no bottom in that crossing? very well then. you shouldnt have me or anybody else to shake your confidence in that knowledge. try to remember that. and another thing: when you get into a dangerous place dont turn coward. that going to help any. it was a good enough lesson but pretty hardly learned. yet about the part of it was that for i so often had to hear a phrase which i had a particular distaste for. it was oh ben if you love me back her! in my preceding i have tried by going into the minutiae of the science of piloting to carry the reader step by step to a comprehension of what the science of; and at the same time i have tried to show him that it is a very curious and wonderful science too and very worthy of his attention. if i have to love my subject it is no surprising thing for i loved the profession far better than any i have since and i took a measureless pride in it. the reason is plain: a pilot in those days was the only unfettered and entirely independent human being that lived in the earth. are but the of parliament and people; sit in chains forged by their constituency; the editor of a newspaper cannot be independent but must work with one hand tied behind him by party and and be content to utter only half or of his mind; no clergyman is a free man and may speak the whole truth regardless of his of all are of the public. we write frankly and fearlessly but then we modify before we print. in truth every man and woman and child a master and and in servitude; but in the day i write of the mississippi pilot had none. the captain could stand upon the hurricane deck in the pomp of a very brief authority and give him five or six while the vessel backed into the stream and then that reign was over. the moment that the boat was under way in the river she was under the sole and unquestioned control of the pilot. he could do with her exactly as he pleased run her when and whither he chose and tie her up to the bank whenever his judgment said that that course was best. his were entirely free; he no one he received from nobody he promptly even the indeed the law of the united forbade him to listen to or rightly considering that the pilot necessarily knew better how to handle the boat than anybody could tell him. so here was the novelty of a king without a keeper an absolute monarch who was absolute in sober truth and not by a fiction of words. i have seen a boy of eighteen taking a great steamer serenely into what almost certain destruction and the aged captain standing mutely by filled with apprehension but powerless to interfere. his interference in that particular instance might have been an excellent thing but to permit it would have been to establish a most pernicious precedent. it will easily be considering the boundless authority that he was a great personage in the old steamboating days. he was treated with marked courtesy by the captain and with marked deference by all the and and this deferential spirit was quickly to the too. i think were about the only people i ever knew who to show in some degree embarrassment in the presence of traveling foreign but then people in own grade of life are not usually embarrassing by long habit came to put all their in the form of it me to this day to put my will in the weak shape of a request instead of launching it in the crisp language of an order. in those old days to load a steamboat at st. louis take her to new orleans and back and discharge cargo about days on an average. seven or eight of these days the boat spent at the of st. louis and new orleans and every soul on board was hard at work except the two they did nothing but play gentleman up town and receive the same wages for it as if they had been on duty. the moment the boat touched the wharf at either city they were ashore; and they were not likely to be seen again till the last bell was ringing and everything in readiness for another voyage. when a captain got hold of a pilot of particularly high reputation he took pains to keep him. when wages were four hundred a month on the upper mississippi i have known a captain to keep such a pilot in idleness under full pay three at a time while the river was frozen up. and one must remember that in those cheap times four hundred was a salary of almost inconceivable splendor. few men on shore got such pay as that and when they did they were mightily up to. when from either end of the river into our small missouri village they were sought by the best and the and treated with exalted respect. lying in port under wages was a thing which many greatly and appreciated; especially if they in the missouri river in the heyday of that trade kansas times and got nine hundred a trip which was equivalent to about eighteen hundred a month. here is a conversation of that day. a chap out of the illinois river with a little tub a couple of ornate and gilded missouri river got a pretty good trip for the upcountry and shall want you about a month. how much will it be? heavens and earth! you take my boat let me have your wages and ill divide! i will remark in passing that mississippi were important in eyes and in their own too in a degree according to the dignity of the boat they were on. for instance it was a proud thing to be of the crew of such stately craft as the aleck scott or the grand turk. negro deck hands and belonging to those were distinguished in their grade of life and they were well aware of that fact too. a stalwart darkey once gave offense at a negro ball in new orleans by putting on a good many airs. finally one of the bustled up to him and said the offender was not disconcerted in the least but swelled himself up and threw that into his voice which that he knew he was not putting on all those airs on a stinted capital. who is i? who is i? i let you know mighty quick who i is! i want you to dat i de middle door on de aleck scott! the barber of the grand turk was a spruce young negro who aired his importance with balmy complacency and was greatly by the circle in which he moved. the young colored population of new orleans were much given to flirting at twilight on the of the back streets. somebody saw and heard something like the following one evening in one of those a negro woman projected her head through a broken pane and shouted very willing that the should hear and envy you mary ann come in de house dis minute! out dah long wid dat low trash an de barber de gran turk to wid you! my reference a moment ago to the fact that a peculiar official position placed him out of the reach of criticism or command stephen w naturally to my mind. he was a gifted pilot a good fellow a tireless talker and had both wit and humor in him. he had a most irreverent independence too and was deliciously easygoing and comfortable in the presence of age official dignity and even the most august wealth. he always had work he never saved a penny he was a most persuasive borrower he was in debt to every pilot on the river and to the majority of the he could throw a sort of splendor around a bit of piloting that made it almost fascinating but not to everybody. he made a trip with good old captain y once and was relieved from duty when the boat got to new orleans. somebody expressed surprise at the discharge. captain y at the mere mention of stephen. then his poor thin old voice piped out something like this: why bless me! i wouldnt have such a wild creature on my boat for the world not for the whole world! he he he he i never saw such an injun to yell. all times of the night it never made any difference to him. he would just yell that way not for anything in particular but merely on account of a kind of devilish comfort he got out of it. i never could get into a sound sleep but he would fetch me out of bed all in a cold sweat with one of those dreadful a queer being very queer being; no respect for anything or anybody. sometimes he me johnny. and he kept a fiddle and a cat. he played execrably. this to distress the cat and so the cat would howl. nobody could sleep where that man and his family was. and reckless. there never was anything like it. now you may believe it or not but as sure as i am sitting here he brought my boat down through those awful at chicot under a rattling head of steam and the wind like the very nation at that! my will tell you so. they saw it. and sir while he was right down through those and i in my shoes and praying i wish i may never speak again if he didnt pucker up his mouth and go to whistling! yes sir; whistling buffalo cant you come out tonight cant you come out tonight cant you come out tonight; and doing it as calmly as if we were attending a funeral and werent related to the corpse. and when i with him about it he down on me as if i was his child and told me to run in the house and try to be good and not be meddling with my once a pretty mean captain caught stephen in new orleans out of work and as usual out of money. he laid steady siege to stephen who was in a very close place and finally persuaded him to hire with him at one hundred and per month just half wages the captain agreeing not to divulge the secret and so bring down the contempt of all the guild upon the poor fellow. but the boat was not more than a day out of new orleans before stephen discovered that the captain was boasting of his exploit and that all the had been told. stephen but said nothing. about the middle of the afternoon the captain stepped out on the hurricane deck cast his eye around and a good deal surprised. he inquiringly aloft at stephen but stephen was whistling placidly and attending to business. the captain stood around a while in evident discomfort and once or twice about to make a suggestion; but the etiquette of the river taught him to avoid that sort of rashness and so he to hold his peace. he chafed and puzzled a few minutes longer then retired to his but soon he was out again and apparently more perplexed than ever. presently he to remark with deference yes i reckon it is; but a body cant be too careful with a steamboat. its pretty safe out here; cant strike any bottom here you can depend on that. the captain departed looking rueful enough. at this rate he would probably die of old age before his boat got to st. louis. next day he on deck and again found stephen faithfully standing up the middle of the river fighting the whole vast force of the mississippi and whistling the same placid tune. this thing was becoming serious. in by the shore was a slower boat clipping along in the easy water and gaining steadily; she to make for an island chute; stephen stuck to the middle of the river. speech was wrung from the captain. he said upon my word this is odd! why those on that boat yonder are going to try it. do you mean to say that you dont know as much as they do? they! why they are but dont you be uneasy; i know as much as any man can afford to know for a hundred and five minutes later stephen was bowling through the chute and showing the rival boat a pair of one day on board the aleck scott my chief mr. was crawling carefully through a close place at cat island both leads going and everybody holding his breath. the captain a nervous apprehensive man kept still as long as he could but finally broke down and shouted from the hurricane deck for gracious sake give her steam mr. give her steam! shell never raise the reef on this headway! for all the effect that was produced upon mr. one would have supposed that no remark had been made. but five minutes later when the danger was past and the leads laid in he burst instantly into a consuming fury and gave the captain the most admirable i ever to. no bloodshed but that was because the cause was weak; for ordinarily he was not a man to take correction quietly. now set forth in detail the nature of the science of piloting and likewise described the rank which the pilot held among the fraternity of this a fitting place to say a few words about an organization which the once formed for the protection of their guild. it was curious and noteworthy in this that it was perhaps the the and the commercial organization ever formed among men. for a long time wages had been two hundred and fifty a month; but curiously enough as multiplied and business increased the wages to fall little by little. it was easy to discover the reason of this. too many were being made. it was nice to have a cub a steersman to do all the hard work for a couple of years gratis while his master sat on a high bench and smoked; all and had sons or who wanted to be by and by it came to pass that nearly every pilot on the river had a steersman. when a steersman had made an amount of progress that was satisfactory to any two in the trade they could get a license for him by signing an application directed to the united inspector. nothing further was needed; usually no were no of capacity required. very well this growing swarm of new presently to undermine the wages in order to get too late apparently the of the tiller perceived their mistake. plainly something had to be done and quickly; but what was to be the needful thing. a close organization. nothing else would answer. to compass this an impossibility; so it was and and then it was too likely to ruin whoever to move in the matter. but at last about a dozen of the and some of them the best on the river themselves into the enterprise and took all the they got a special charter from the legislature with large under the name of the benevolent association; elected their completed their organization capital put association wages up to two hundred and fifty at once and then retired to their for they were promptly discharged from employment. but there were two or three unnoticed in their which had the of propagation in them. for instance all idle of the association in good standing were entitled to a pension of per month. this to bring in one straggler after another from the of the in the dull summer season. better have than starve; the initiation fee was only twelve and no required from the unemployed. also the of deceased in good standing could draw per month and a certain sum for each of their also the said deceased would be buried at the expense. these things all the superannuated and forgotten in the mississippi valley. they came from they came from interior they came from everywhere. they came on on in any way so they got there. they paid in their twelve and straightway to draw out a month and calculate their burial by and by all the useless helpless and a dozen were in the association and of the best out of it and laughing at it. it was the laughingstock of the whole river. everybody about the bylaw to pay ten per cent. of their wages every month into the treasury for the support of the association whereas all the were outcast and and no one would employ them. everybody was derisively grateful to the association for taking all the worthless out of the way and leaving the whole field to the excellent and the deserving; and everybody was not only jocularly grateful for that but for a result which naturally namely the gradual advance of wages as the busy season wages had gone up from the low figure of one hundred a month to one hundred and and in some to one hundred and fifty; and it was great fun to enlarge upon the fact that this charming thing had been accomplished by a body of men not one of whom received a particle of benefit from it. some of the used to call at the association rooms and have a good time chaffing the and offering them the charity of taking them as for a trip so that they could see what the forgotten river like. however the association was content; or at least it gave no sign to the contrary. now and then it a pilot who was out of luck and added him to its list; and these later were very valuable for they were good the incompetent had all been absorbed before. as business wages gradually up to two hundred and fifty the association figure and firmly fixed there; and still without a member of that body for no member was hired. the hilarity at the expense burst all bounds now. there was no end to the fun which that poor martyr had to put up with. however it is a long lane that no turning. winter business doubled and and an avalanche of missouri illinois and upper mississippi river came pouring down to take a chance in the new orleans trade. all of a sudden were in great demand and were correspondingly scarce. the time for revenge was come. it was a bitter pill to have to accept association at last yet and agreed that there was no other way. but none of these so there was a still pill to be they must be sought out and for their services. captain was the first man who found it necessary to take the dose and he had been the derider of the organization. he hunted up one of the best of the association and said well you have rather got the best of us for a little while so ill give in with as good a grace as i can. come to hire you; get your trunk aboard right away. i want to leave at twelve oclock. do you mean to tell me that you wont turn a wheel with one of the very best and on the river because he dont belong to your association? well if this putting on airs! i supposed i was doing you a benevolence; but i begin to think that i am the party that a favor done. are you acting under a law of the concern? so they stepped into the association rooms and the secretary soon satisfied the captain who said i will provide for you said the secretary. i will detail a pilot to go with you and he shall be on board at twelve oclock. but if i discharge s he will come on me for the whole wages. of course that is a matter between you and mr. s captain. we cannot meddle in your private affairs. the captain but to no purpose. in the end he had to discharge s pay him about a thousand and take an association pilot in his place. the laugh was beginning to turn the other way now. every day thenceforward a new victim fell; every day some outraged captain discharged a pet with tears and profanity and a hated association man in his berth. in a very little while idle to be pretty plenty brisk as business was and much as their services were desired. the laugh was shifting to the other side of their most palpably. these together with the and presently to laugh altogether and to rage about the revenge they would take when the passing business spurt was over. soon all the that were left were the and of that had two but their triumph was not very for this reason: it was a rigid rule of the association that its should never under any circumstances whatever give information about the channel to any outsider. by this time about half the had none but association and the other half had none but at the first glance one would suppose that when it came to forbidding information about the river these two could play equally at that game; but this was not so. at every town from one end of the river to the other there was a to land at instead of a wharf or a pier. freight was in it for transportation; waiting slept in its upon each of these the placed a strong box fastened with a peculiar lock which was used in no other service but one the united mail service. it was the lock a sacred governmental thing. by dint of much beseeching the government had been persuaded to allow the association to use this lock. every association man carried a key which would open these that key or rather a peculiar way of holding it in the hand when its owner was for river information by a stranger for the success of the st. louis and new orleans association had now bred tolerably thriving in a dozen neighboring steamboat was the association mans sign and diploma of membership; and if the stranger did not respond by a similar key and holding it in a certain manner duly prescribed his question was politely ignored. from the secretary each member received a package of more or less gorgeous printed like a billhead on handsome paper properly ruled in a billhead worded something like this these were filled up day by day as the voyage and in the several for instance as soon as the first crossing out from st. louis was completed the would be upon the blank under the appropriate thus st. louis. nine and a half stern on courthouse head on dead cottonwood above woodyard until you raise the first reef then pull up square. then under head of go just outside the this is important. new snag just where you straighten down; go above it. the pilot who that blank in the cairo box after to it the details of every crossing all the way down from st. louis took out and read half a dozen fresh from concerning the river between cairo and memphis posted himself thoroughly returned them to the box and went back aboard his boat again so armed against accident that he could not possibly get his boat into trouble without bringing the most ingenious carelessness to his aid. imagine the of so admirable a system in a piece of river twelve or thirteen hundred miles long whose channel was shifting every day! the pilot who had formerly been obliged to put up with seeing a shoal place once or possibly twice a month had a hundred sharp eyes to watch it for him now and of intelligent brains to tell him how to run it. his information about it was seldom hours old. if the in the last box to leave any on his mind concerning a treacherous crossing he had his remedy; he his in a peculiar way as soon as he saw a boat approaching; the signal was in a peculiar way if that were association men; and then the two ranged alongside and all were swept away by fresh information furnished to the inquirer by word of mouth and in minute detail. the first thing a pilot did when he new orleans or st. louis was to take his final and elaborate report to the association and hang it up there after which he was free to visit his family. in these a crowd was always gathered together in the channel and the moment there was a fresh arrival everybody stopped talking till this witness had told the news and settled the latest uncertainty. other can sink the shop sometimes and interest themselves in other not so with a pilot; he must devote himself wholly to his profession and talk of nothing else; for it would be small gain to be perfect one day and imperfect the next. he no time or words to waste if he would keep posted. but the had a hard time of it. no particular place to meet and exchange information no none but chance and unsatisfactory ways of getting news. the consequence was that a man sometimes had to run five hundred miles of river on information that was a week or ten days old. at a fair stage of the river that might have but when the dead low water came it was destructive. now came another perfectly logical result. the to ground sink them and get into all of trouble whereas to keep entirely away from the association men. wherefore even the and of furnished exclusively with and previously considered to be wholly independent of the association and free to comfort themselves with brag and laughter to feel pretty uncomfortable. still they made a show of keeping up the brag until one black day when every captain of the lot was formally ordered to immediately discharge his and take association in their stead. and who was it that had the dashing presumption to do that? alas it came from a power behind the throne that was greater than the throne itself. it was the it was no time to swap every outsider had to take his trunk ashore at once. of course it was supposed that there was collusion between the association and the but this was not so. the latter had come to comprehend the excellence of the report system of the association and the safety it and so they had made their decision among themselves and upon plain business there was weeping and wailing and of teeth in the camp of the now. but no matter there was but one course for them to pursue and they pursued it. they came forward in and and their twelve and for membership. they were surprised to learn that several new had been long ago added. for instance the initiation fee had been raised to fifty that sum must be and also ten per cent. of the wages which the applicant had received each and every month since the founding of the association. in many this to three or four hundred still the association would not entertain the application until the money was present. even then a single adverse vote the application. every member had to vote yes or no in person and before so it took to decide a candidacy because many were so long absent on however the repentant scraped their savings together and one by one by our tedious voting process they were added to the fold. a time came at last when only about ten outside. they said they would starve before they would apply. they idle a long while because of course nobody could venture to employ them. by and by the association published the fact that upon a certain date the wages would be raised to five hundred per month. all the branch had grown strong now and the red river one had advanced wages to seven hundred a month. reluctantly the ten in view of these things and made application. there was another new bylaw by this time which required them to pay not only on all the wages they had received since the association was born but also on what they would have received if they had continued at work up to the time of their application instead of going off to pout in idleness. it turned out to be a difficult matter to elect them but it was accomplished at last. the most virulent sinner of this batch had stayed out and to accumulate against him so long that he had to send in six hundred and with his application. the association had a good bank account now and was very strong. there was no longer an outsider. a bylaw was added forbidding the reception of any more or for five years; after which time a limited number would be taken not by but by the association upon these terms: the applicant must not be less than eighteen years old and of respectable family and good character; he must pass an examination as to education pay a thousand in advance for the privilege of becoming an apprentice and must remain under the of the association until a great part of the membership more than half i think should be willing to sign his application for a license. all were now taken away from their masters and adopted by the association. the president and secretary detailed them for service on one boat or another as they chose and changed them from boat to boat according to certain if a pilot could show that he was in infirm health and needed assistance one of the would be ordered to go with him. the widow and orphan list grew but so did the financial the association attended its own in state and paid for them. when occasion it sent down the river upon for the of brethren lost by steamboat a search of this kind sometimes cost a thousand the association a charter and went into the insurance business also. it not only insured the of its but took on the organization indestructible. it was the monopoly in the world. by the united law no man could become a pilot unless two duly licensed signed his application; and now there was nobody outside of the association competent to sign. consequently the making of was at an end. every year some would die and become incapacitated by age and infirmity; there would be no new to take their in time the association could put wages up to any figure it chose; and as long as it should be wise enough not to carry the thing too far and provoke the national government into the system steamboat would have to submit since there would be no help for it. the and were the only obstruction that lay between the association and absolute power; and at last this one was removed. incredible as it may seem the and deliberately did it themselves. when the association announced beforehand that on the first day of september wages would be advanced to five hundred per month the and instantly put up a few and to the along the river the necessity of it by calling their attention to the burdensome rate of wages about to be established. it was a rather slender argument but the did not seem to detect it. it reasonable to them that to add five freight on a bushel of corn was justifiable under the circumstances overlooking the fact that this advance on a cargo of forty thousand was a good deal more than necessary to cover the new wages. so straightway the and got up an association of their own and to put wages up to five hundred too and move for another advance in it was a novel idea but of course an effect which had been produced once could be produced again. the new association decreed for this was before all the had been taken into the association that if any captain employed a pilot he should be forced to discharge him and also pay a fine of five hundred several of these heavy were paid before the organization grew strong enough to exercise full authority over its membership; but that all presently. the tried to get the to decree that no member of their corporation should serve under a captain; but this proposition was declined. the saw that they would be backed up by the and the anyhow and so they wisely from entering into entangling as i have the association was now the monopoly in the world perhaps and simply indestructible. and yet the days of its glory were first the new railroad stretching up through mississippi tennessee and kentucky to northern railway to divert the passenger travel from the next the war came and almost entirely annihilated the steamboating industry during several years leaving most of the idle and the cost of living advancing all the time; then the treasurer of the st. louis association put his hand into the till and off with every dollar of the ample fund; and finally the intruding everywhere there was little for to do when the war was over but carry so straightway some genius from the atlantic coast the plan of towing a dozen steamer down to new orleans at the tail of a vulgar little tugboat; and behold in the twinkling of an eye as it were the association and the noble science of piloting were things of the dead and pathetic past! it was always the custom for the to leave new orleans between four and five oclock in the afternoon. from three oclock onward they would be burning rosin and pitch pine the sign of preparation and so one had the picturesque spectacle of a rank some two or three miles long of tall ascending of smoke; a colonnade which supported a sable roof of the same smoke blended together and spreading abroad over the city. every boat had its flag flying at the and sometimes a duplicate on the verge staff astern. two or three miles of mates were commanding and swearing with more than usual emphasis; countless of freight barrels and were spinning athwart the levee and flying aboard the belated were dodging and skipping among these frantic things to reach the forecastle companion way alive but their about it; with and were trying to keep up with with and crying and making a failure of it by losing their in the whirl and roar and general distraction; and were hither and thither in a wild hurry every now and then getting blocked and jammed together and then during ten one could not see them for the profanity except vaguely and dimly; every windlass connected with every forehatch from one end of that long array of to the other was keeping up a deafening whiz and whir lowering freight into the hold and the of that worked them were roaring such as de las sack! de las sack! inspired to unimaginable exaltation by the chaos of turmoil and racket that was driving everybody else mad. by this time the hurricane and boiler of the would be packed and black with the last would begin to clang all down the line and then the powwow to double; in a moment or two the final warning came a simultaneous din of chinese with the cry all dat aint please to git and behold the powwow people came swarming ashore excited that were trying to swarm aboard. one more moment later a long array of was being in each with its customary latest passenger clinging to the end of it with teeth and everything else and the customary latest procrastinator making a wild spring shoreward over his head. now a number of the slide backward into the stream leaving wide in the serried rank of crowd the of that are not to go in order to see the sight. steamer after steamer herself up all her strength and presently comes swinging by under a tremendous head of steam with flag flying black smoke rolling and her entire crew of and usually swarthy together on the forecastle the best voice in the lot towering from the midst being mounted on the capstan waving his hat or a flag and all roaring a mighty chorus while the parting boom and the multitudinous swing their and huzza! steamer after steamer falls into line and the stately procession goes its flight up the river. in the old times whenever two fast out on a race with a big crowd of people looking on it was inspiring to hear the sing especially if the time were nightfall and the forecastle lit up with the red glare of the racing was royal fun. the public always had an idea that racing was dangerous; whereas the opposite was the case that is after the laws were which restricted each boat to just so many of steam to the square inch. no engineer was ever sleepy or careless when his heart was in a race. he was constantly on the alert trying and watching things. the dangerous place was on slow plodding where the around and chips to get into the doctor and shut off the water supply from the in the flush times of steamboating a race between two notoriously fleet was an event of vast importance. the date was set for it several in advance and from that time forward the whole mississippi valley was in a state of consuming excitement. politics and the weather were and people only of the coming race. as the time the two stripped and got ready. every encumbrance that added weight or exposed a resisting surface to wind or water was removed if the boat could possibly do without it. the and sometimes even their supporting were sent ashore and no means left to set the boat afloat in case she got aground. when the eclipse and the a. l. ran their great race many years ago it was said that pains were taken to scrape the gilding off the fanciful device which hung between the and that for that one trip the captain left off his kid and had his head shaved. but i always these things. if the boat was known to make her best speed when drawing five and a half forward and five aft she was carefully loaded to that exact figure she wouldnt enter a dose of homoeopathic on her manifest after that. hardly any were taken because they not only add weight but they never will trim boat. they always run to the side when there is anything to see whereas a conscientious and experienced steamboatman would stick to the center of the boat and part his hair in the middle with a spirit level. no and no were for the would stop only at the and then it would be only touch and go. coal flats and wood flats were contracted for beforehand and these were kept ready to hitch on to the flying at a warning. double were carried so that all work could be quickly done. the chosen date being come and all things in readiness the two great back into the stream and lie there a moment and apparently watching each movement like sentient drooping the pent steam shrieking through the black smoke rolling and tumbling from the and darkening all the air. people people everywhere; the the the the are packed with them and you know that the of the broad mississippi are going to be fringed with humanity thence northward twelve hundred miles to welcome these presently tall of steam burst from the of both two boom a goodbye two mounted on wave their small above the on the two plaintive linger on the air a few waiting two mighty burst forth and here they come! brass bray hail columbia huzza after huzza from the and the stately go whistling by like the wind. those will never halt a moment between new orleans and st. louis except for a second or two at large or to hitch alongside. you should be on board when they take a couple of those in tow and turn a swarm of men into each; by the time you have your glasses and put them on you will be wondering what become of that wood. two nicely matched will stay in sight of each other day after day. they might even stay side by side but for the fact that are not all alike and the will win the race. if one of the a lightning pilot whose partner is a trifle his inferior you can tell which one is on watch by whether that boat ground or lost some during each stretch. the pilot can delay a boat if he not a fine genius for steering. steering is a very high art. one must not keep a rudder dragging across a stem if he to get up the river fast. there is a great difference in of course. for a long time i was on a boat that was so slow we used to forget what year it was we left port in. but of course this was at rare used to lose valuable because their grew old and waiting for us to get by. this was at still i had the for these but through carelessness they have been mislaid. this boat the john j. roe was so slow that when she finally sunk in madrid bend it was five years before the heard of it. that was always a confusing fact to me but it is according to the record any way. she was dismally slow; still we often had pretty exciting times racing with and rafts and such things. one trip however we did rather well. we went to st. louis in sixteen days. but even at this rattling gait i think we changed three times in fort adams reach which is five miles long. a reach is a piece of straight river and of course the current through such a place in a pretty lively way. that trip we went to grand gulf from new orleans in four days three hundred and forty miles; the eclipse and did it in one. we were nine days out in the chute of seven hundred miles; the eclipse and went there in two days. something over a generation ago a boat the j. m. white went from new orleans to cairo in three days six hours and minutes. in the eclipse made the same trip in three days three hours and twenty time disputed. some authorities add hour and minutes to this. in the r. e. lee did it in three days and one hour. this last is the fastest trip on record. i will try to show that it was not. for this reason: the distance between new orleans and cairo when the j. m. white ran it was about eleven hundred and six miles; consequently her average speed was a trifle over fourteen miles per hour. in the day the distance between the two had become reduced to one thousand and eighty miles; consequently her average speed was a shade under fourteen and miles per hour. in the r. e. lees time the distance had diminished to about one thousand and thirty miles; consequently her average was about fourteen and miles per hour. therefore the was conspicuously the fastest time that ever been made. these dry details are of importance in one particular. they give me an opportunity of one of the that of shortening its length from time to time. if you will throw a long pliant over your shoulder it will pretty fairly shape itself into an average section of the mississippi river; that is the nine or ten hundred miles stretching from cairo illinois southward to new orleans the same being wonderfully crooked with a brief straight bit here and there at wide the two stretch from cairo northward to st. louis is by no means so crooked that being a rocky country which the river cannot cut much. the water the alluvial banks of the lower river into deep horseshoe so deep indeed that in some if you were to get ashore at one extremity of the horseshoe and walk across the neck half or three quarters of a mile you could sit down and rest a couple of hours while your steamer was coming around the long elbow at a speed of ten miles an hour to take you aboard again. when the river is rising fast some scoundrel whose plantation is back in the country and therefore of inferior value only to watch his chance cut a little gutter across the narrow neck of land some dark night and turn the water into it and in a wonderfully short time a miracle to wit the whole mississippi taken possession of that little ditch and placed the plantation on its bank quadrupling its value and that other formerly valuable plantation itself away out yonder on a big island; the old watercourse around it will soon shoal up cannot approach within ten miles of it and down goes its value to a fourth of its former worth. are kept on those narrow at needful times and if a man to be caught cutting a ditch across them the are all against his ever another opportunity to cut a ditch. pray observe some of the effects of this business. once there was a neck opposite port hudson louisiana which was only half a mile across in its place. you could walk across there in fifteen minutes; but if you made the journey around the cape on a raft you traveled miles to accomplish the same thing. in the river through that neck deserted its old bed and thus shortened itself miles. in the same way it shortened itself miles at black hawk point in . below red river landing cutoff was made forty or fifty years ago i think. this shortened the river miles. in our day if you travel by river from the southernmost of these three to the northernmost you go only seventy miles. to do the same thing a hundred and years ago one had to go a hundred and miles! shortening of miles in that trifling distance. at some forgotten time in the past were made above vidalia louisiana; at island ; at island ; and at point. these shortened the river in the aggregate miles. since my own day on the mississippi have been made at hurricane island; at island ; at napoleon arkansas; at walnut bend; and at council bend. these shortened the river in the aggregate miles. in my own time a cutoff was made at american bend which shortened the river ten miles or more. therefore the mississippi between cairo and new orleans was twelve hundred and fifteen miles long one hundred and years ago. it was eleven hundred and eighty after the cutoff of . it was one thousand and forty after the american bend cutoff. it lost miles since. consequently its length is only nine hundred and miles at present. now if i wanted to be one of those ponderous scientific people and let on to prove what had in the remote past by what had in a given time in the recent past or what will occur in the far future by what in late years what an opportunity is here! geology never had such a chance nor such exact data to argue from! nor development of species either! glacial are great things but they are vague vague. please observe: in the space of one hundred and years the lower mississippi shortened itself two hundred and miles. that is an average of a trifle over one mile and a third per year. therefore any calm person who is not blind or idiotic can see that in the old oolitic silurian period just a million years ago next november the lower mississippi river was upwards of one million three hundred thousand miles long and stuck out over the gulf of mexico like a and by the same token any person can see that seven hundred and years from now the lower mississippi will be only a mile and long and cairo and new orleans will have joined their streets together and be plodding comfortably along under a single mayor and a mutual board of there is something fascinating about science. one such wholesale of conjecture out of such a trifling investment of fact. when the water to flow through one of those i have been speaking of it is time for the people thereabouts to move. the water the banks away like a knife. by the time the ditch become twelve or fifteen wide the calamity is as good as accomplished for no power on earth can stop it now. when the width a hundred the banks begin to peel off in half an acre wide. the current flowing around the bend traveled formerly only five miles an hour; now it is tremendously increased by the shortening of the distance. i was on board the first boat that tried to go through the cutoff at american bend but we did not get through. it was toward midnight and a wild night it was thunder lightning and of rain. it was that the current in the cutoff was making about fifteen or twenty miles an hour; twelve or thirteen was the best our boat could do even in tolerably slack water therefore perhaps we were foolish to try the cutoff. however mr. brown was ambitious and he kept on trying. the eddy running up the bank under the point was about as swift as the current out in the middle; so we would go flying up the shore like a lightning express train get on a big head of steam and stand by for a surge when we struck the current that was whirling by the point. but all our were useless. the instant the current hit us it spun us around like a top the water the forecastle and the boat so far over that one could hardly keep his the next instant we were away down the river with might and main to keep out of the woods. we tried the experiment four times. i stood on the forecastle companion way to see. it was astonishing to observe how suddenly the boat would spin around and turn tail the moment she from the eddy and the current struck her nose. the sounding concussion and the quivering would have been about the same if she had come full speed against a sandbank. under the lightning one could see the plantation and the goodly acres tumble into the river; and the crash they made was not a bad effort at thunder. once when we spun around we only missed a house about twenty that had a light burning in the window; and in the same instant that house went overboard. nobody could stay on our forecastle; the water swept across it in a torrent every time we athwart the current. at the end of our fourth effort we brought up in the woods two miles below the cutoff; all the country there was of course. a day or two later the cutoff was of a mile wide and up through it without much difficulty and so saved ten miles. the old cutoff reduced the length miles. there used to be a tradition connected with it. it was said that a boat came along there in the night and went around the enormous elbow the usual way the not knowing that the cutoff had been made. it was a grisly hideous night and all were vague and distorted. the old bend had already begun to fill up and the boat got to running away from mysterious and occasionally hitting one. the perplexed fell to swearing and finally uttered the entirely unnecessary wish that they might never get out of that place. as always in such that particular prayer was and the neglected. so to this day that phantom steamer is still butting around in that deserted river trying to find her way out. more than one grave watchman sworn to me that on drizzly dismal nights he fearfully down that forgotten river as he the head of the island and seen the faint glow of the specter drifting through the distant gloom and heard the muffled cough of her and the plaintive cry of her in the absence of further statistics i beg to close this with one more reminiscence of stephen. most of the and held note for ranging from two hundred and fifty upward. stephen never paid one of these but he was very prompt and very zealous about renewing them every twelve of course there came a time at last when stephen could no longer borrow of his ancient so he was obliged to lie in wait for new men who did not know him. such a victim was goodhearted simple young i use a fictitious name but the real name as this one does with a y. young graduated as a pilot got a berth and when the month was ended and he stepped up to the office and received his two hundred and fifty in crisp new stephen was there! his silvery tongue to wag and in a very little while two hundred and fifty had changed hands. the fact was soon known at pilot headquarters and the amusement and satisfaction of the old were large and generous. but innocent never suspected that promise to pay promptly at the end of the week was a worthless one. for his money at the time; stephen sweetened him up and put him off a week. he then according to agreement and came away again but suffering under another postponement. so the thing went on. haunted stephen week after week to no purpose and at last gave it up. and then straightway stephen to haunt wherever there was the inevitable stephen. and not only there but beaming with affection and gushing with for not being able to pay. by and by whenever poor saw him coming he would turn and fly and drag his company with him if he had company; but it was of no use; his debtor would run him down and corner him. panting and stephen would come with outstretched hands and eager eyes invade the conversation shake both of arms loose in their and begin my what a race had! i saw you didnt see me and so i clapped on all steam for fear id miss you entirely. and here you are! there just stand so and let me look at you! just the same old noble countenance. to friend: just look at him! look at him! aint it just good to look at him! aint it now? aint he just a picture! some call him a picture; i call him a panorama! thats what he is an entire panorama. and now how i do wish i could have seen you an hour earlier! for hours been saving up that two hundred and fifty for you; been looking for you everywhere. i at the from six yesterday evening till two oclock this morning without rest or food; my wife where have you been all night? i said this debt heavy on my mind. she in all my days i never saw a man take a debt to heart the way you do. i said its my nature; how can i change it? she well do go to bed and get some rest. i said not till that poor noble young man got his money. so i set up all night and this morning out i shot and the first man i struck told me you had shipped on the grand turk and gone to new orleans. well sir i had to lean up against a building and cry. so help me goodness i help it. the man that owned the place come out cleaning up with a rag and said he didnt like to have people cry against his building and then it to me that the whole world had turned against me and it wasnt any use to live any more; and coming along an hour ago suffering no man what agony i met jim wilson and paid him the two hundred and fifty on account; and to think that here you are now and i havent got a cent! but as sure as i am standing here on this ground on this particular brick there a mark on the brick to remember it by ill borrow that money and pay it over to you at twelve oclock sharp tomorrow! now stand so; let me look at you just once more. and so on. life a burden to him. he could not escape his debtor and his awful on account of not being able to pay. he dreaded to show himself in the street lest he should find stephen lying in wait for him at the corner. billiard saloon was a great resort for in those days. they met there about as much to exchange river news as to play. one morning was there; stephen was there too but kept out of sight. but by and by when about all the had who were in town stephen suddenly in the midst and rushed for as for a brother. oh i am so glad to see you! oh my soul the sight of you is such a comfort to my eyes! i owe all of you money; among you i owe probably forty thousand i want to pay it; i intend to pay it every last cent of it. you all know without my telling you what sorrow it cost me to remain so long under such deep to such patient and generous but the pang i suffer by far the is from the debt i owe to this noble young man here; and i have come to this place this morning especially to make the announcement that i have at last found a method whereby i can pay off all my and most especially i wanted him to be here when i announced it. yes my faithful friend my benefactor found the method! found the method to pay off all my and get your money! hope in eye; then stephen beaming benignantly and his hand upon head added i am going to pay them off in alphabetical order! then he turned and the full significance of method did not dawn upon the perplexed and musing crowd for some two minutes; and then with a sigh well the stand a gaudy chance. he wont get any further than the cs in this world and i reckon that after a good deal of eternity wasted away in the next one ill still be to up there as that poor ragged pilot that came here from st. louis in the early days! during the two or two and a half years of my apprenticeship i under many and had experience of many of and many of for it was not always convenient for mr. to have me with him and in such he sent me with somebody else. i am to this day profiting somewhat by that experience; for in that brief sharp schooling i got personally and familiarly acquainted with about all the different of human nature that are to be found in fiction biography or history. the fact is daily borne in upon me that the average as much as forty years to equip a man with this sort of an education. when i say i am still profiting by this thing i do not mean that it constituted me a judge of men no it not done that; for judges of men are born not made. my profit is various in kind and degree; but the feature of it which i value most is the zest which that early experience given to my later reading. when i find a character in fiction or biography i generally take a warm personal interest in him for the reason that i have known him before met him on the river. the figure that comes before me out of the of that vanished time is that of brown of the steamer pennsylvania the man to in a former chapter whose memory was so good and tiresome. he was a long slim bony ignorant stingy malicious fault hunting tyrant. i early got the habit of coming on watch with dread at my heart. no matter how good a time i might have been with the below and no matter how high my spirits might be when i aloft my soul lead in my body the moment i the pilothouse. i still remember the first time i ever the presence of that man. the boat had backed out from st. louis and was down; i to the pilothouse in high feather and very proud to be semiofficially a member of the executive family of so fast and famous a boat. brown was at the wheel. i in the middle of the room all fixed to make my bow but brown did not look around. i thought he took a furtive glance at me out of the corner of his eye but as not even this notice was repeated i i had been mistaken. by this time he was picking his way among some dangerous abreast the therefore it would not be proper to interrupt him; so i stepped softly to the high bench and took a seat. there was silence for ten minutes; then my new boss turned and me deliberately and painstakingly from head to heel for about as it to me a quarter of an hour. after which he removed his countenance and i saw it no more for some then it came around once more and this question me i told him. he repeated it after me. it was probably the only thing he ever forgot; for although i was with him many he never addressed himself to me in any other way than here! and then his command by means of a dozen or so of pretty direct he pumped my family history out of me. the leads were going now in the first crossing. this interrupted the inquest. when the leads had been laid in he i did so. he stepped back the shoe minutely and contemptuously scratching his head thoughtfully tilting his high sugarloaf hat well forward to facilitate the operation then well ill be dod and returned to his wheel. what occasion there was to be dod about it is a thing which is still as much of a mystery to me now as it was then. it must have been all of fifteen minutes fifteen minutes of dull homesick silence before that long swung round upon me again and then what a change! it was as red as fire and every muscle in it was working. now came this shriek i lit in the middle of the floor shot there by the electric suddenness of the surprise. as soon as i could get my voice i said apologetically: i have had no sir. youve had no my what a fine bird we are! we must have our father was a gentleman owned and weve been to school. yes we are a gentleman too and got to have is it? is what you want! dod dern my skin ill learn you to swell yourself up and blow around here about your from the wheel! i had it without knowing it. i moved back a step or two and stood as in a dream all my stupefied by this frantic assault. what you standing there for? take that down to the move along and dont you be all day about it! i find the i had to go all the way to the pantry. put down that shovel! numskull i ever saw aint even got sense enough to load up a stove. all through the watch this sort of thing went on. yes and the subsequent were much like it during a stretch of as i have said i soon got the habit of coming on duty with dread. the moment i was in the presence even in the night i could feel those yellow eyes upon me and knew their owner was watching for a pretext to spit out some venom on me. preliminarily he would say then he would jump from the bench snatch the wheel from me and meet her himself pouring out wrath upon me all the time. george was the other cub. he was good times now; for his boss george was as kindhearted as brown wasnt. had for brown the season before; consequently he knew exactly how to entertain himself and plague me all by the one operation. whenever i took the wheel for a moment on watch would sit back on the bench and play brown with continual of snatch her! snatch her! mudcat i ever saw! here! where you going now? going to run over that snag? pull her down! dont you hear me? pull her down! there she goes! just as i expected! i told you not to cramp that reef. from the wheel! so i always had a rough time of it no matter whose watch it was; and sometimes it to me that badgering was pretty nearly as aggravating as nagging. i often wanted to kill brown but this would not answer. a cub had to take everything his boss gave in the way of vigorous comment and criticism; and we all that there was a united law making it a penitentiary offense to strike or threaten a pilot who was on duty. however i could imagine myself killing brown; there was no law against that; and that was the thing i used always to do the moment i was abed. instead of going over my river in my mind as was my duty i threw business aside for pleasure and brown. i brown every night for not in old stale commonplace ways but in new and picturesque ways that were sometimes surprising for freshness of design and ghastliness of situation and environment. brown was always watching for a pretext to find fault; and if he could find no plausible pretext he would invent one. he would scold you for shaving a shore and for not shaving it; for hugging a bar and for not hugging it; for pulling down when not and for not pulling down when not for firing up without and for waiting for in a word it was his invariable rule to find fault with everything you did; and another invariable rule of his was to throw all his to you into the form of an insult. one day we were approaching new madrid bound down and heavily laden. brown was at one side of the wheel steering; i was at the other standing by to pull down or shove up. he cast a furtive glance at me every now and then. i had long ago learned what that meant; he was trying to invent a trap for me. i what shape it was going to take. by and by he stepped back from the wheel and said in his usual snarly way this was simply bound to be a success; nothing could prevent it; for he had never me to round the boat to before; consequently no matter how i might do the thing he could find free fault with it. he stood back there with his greedy eye on me and the result was what might have been i lost my head in a quarter of a minute and didnt know what i was about; i too early to bring the boat around but detected a green gleam of joy in eye and corrected my mistake; i around once more while too high up but corrected myself again in time; i made other false and still to save myself; but at last i grew so confused and anxious that i tumbled into the very worst blunder of all i got too far down before beginning to fetch the boat around. chance was come. his face turned red with passion; he made one bound hurled me across the house with a sweep of his arm spun the wheel down and to pour out a stream of vituperation upon me which till he was out of breath. in the course of this speech he me all the different of hard names he could think of and once or twice i thought he was even going to swear but he didnt this time. dod dern was the nearest he to the luxury of swearing for he had been brought up with a wholesome respect for future fire and brimstone. that was an uncomfortable hour; for there was a big audience on the hurricane deck. when i went to bed that night i brown in seventeen different ways all of them new. two later i got into serious trouble. brown was steering; i was pulling down. my younger brother on the hurricane deck and shouted to brown to stop at some landing or other a mile or so below. brown gave no intimation that he had heard anything. but that was his way: he never to take notice of an under clerk. the wind was blowing; brown was deaf although he always pretended he wasnt and i very much if he had heard the order. if i had two i would have spoken; but as i had only one it judicious to take care of it; so i kept still. presently sure enough we went sailing by that plantation. captain klinefelter on the deck and said let her come around sir let her come around. didnt henry tell you to land here? he did come up; and thats all the good it done the fool. he never said anything. of course i didnt want to be mixed up in this business but there was no way to avoid it; so i said i closed my mouth according to instructions. an hour later henry the pilothouse unaware of what had been going on. he was a thoroughly inoffensive boy and i was sorry to see him come for i knew brown would have no pity on him. brown straightway brown at me in unaffected surprise; and for as much as a moment he was entirely speechless; then he shouted to me ill attend to your case in half a minute! then to henry and you leave the pilothouse; out with you! it was pilot law and must be the boy out and even had his foot on the upper step outside the door when brown with a sudden access of fury picked up a lump of coal and sprang after him; but i was between with a heavy stool and i hit brown a good honest blow which out. i had committed the crime of i had lifted my hand against a pilot on duty! i supposed i was booked for the penitentiary sure and be booked any if i went on and squared my long account with this person while i had the chance; consequently i stuck to him and him with my a considerable time i do not know how long the pleasure of it probably made it seem longer than it really was; but in the end he free and up and sprang to the wheel: a very natural solicitude for all this time here was this steamboat tearing down the river at the rate of fifteen miles an hour and nobody at the helm! however eagle bend was two miles wide at this bankfull stage and correspondingly long and deep; and the boat was steering herself straight down the middle and taking no still that was only luck a body might have found her charging into the woods. perceiving at a glance that the pennsylvania was in no danger brown gathered up the big spyglass fashion and ordered me out of the pilothouse with more than comanche bluster. but i was not afraid of him now; so instead of going i and his grammar; i reformed his ferocious for him and put them into good english calling his attention to the advantage of pure english over the bastard dialect of the pennsylvanian whence he was extracted. he could have done his part to admiration in a crossfire of mere vituperation of course; but he was not equipped for this species of controversy; so he presently laid aside his glass and took the wheel muttering and shaking his head; and i retired to the bench. the racket had brought everybody to the hurricane deck and i when i saw the old captain looking up from the midst of the crowd. i said to myself now i am done for! for although as a rule he was so fatherly and indulgent toward the family and so patient of minor he could be stern enough when the fault was worth it. i tried to imagine what he would do to a cub pilot who had been guilty of such a crime as mine committed on a boat with costly freight and alive with our watch was nearly ended. i thought i would go and hide somewhere till i got a chance to slide ashore. so i slipped out of the pilothouse and down the steps and around to the texas door and was in the act of gliding within when the captain me! i my head and he stood over me in silence a moment or two then said impressively i into his wake; he led the way to his parlor in the forward end of the texas. we were alone now. he closed the after door; then moved slowly to the forward one and closed that. he sat down; i stood before him. he at me some little time then said are you aware that this boat was plowing down the river fully five minutes with no one at the wheel? deuced glad of it! hark ye never mention that i said that. you have been guilty of a great crime; and dont you ever be guilty of it again on this boat. but lay for him ashore! give him a good sound thrashing do you hear? ill pay the now go and mind you not a word of this to anybody. clear out with you! youve been guilty of a great crime you whelp! i slid out happy with the sense of a close shave and a mighty deliverance; and i heard him laughing to himself and slapping his fat after i had closed his door. when brown came off watch he went straight to the captain who was talking with some on the boiler deck and that i be put ashore in new orleans and added i wont even stay on the same boat with him. one of us got to go ashore. very well said the captain let it be yourself; and his talk with the during the brief remainder of the trip i knew how an emancipated slave for i was an emancipated slave myself. while we lay at i to george flute; or to his from his two that is to say goldsmith and shakespeare; or i played chess with him and would have beaten him sometimes only he always took back his last move and ran the game out differently. we lay three days in new orleans but the captain did not succeed in finding another pilot; so he that i should stand a daylight watch and leave the night to george but i was afraid; i had never stood a watch of any sort by myself and i i should be sure to get into trouble in the head of some chute or ground the boat in a near cut through some bar or other. brown in his place; but he would not travel with me. so the captain gave me an order on the captain of the a. t. for a passage to st. louis and said he would find a new pilot there and my berth could then be the was to leave a couple of days after the pennsylvania. the night before the pennsylvania left henry and i sat chatting on a freight pile on the levee till midnight. the subject of the chat mainly was one which i think we had not exploited before steamboat one was then on its way to us little as we suspected it; the water which was to make the steam which should cause it was washing past some point fifteen hundred miles up the river while we but it would arrive at the right time and the right place. we if not clothed with authority were of much use in of disaster and attendant panic; still they might be of some use; so we decided that if a disaster ever fell within our experience we would at least stick to the boat and give such minor service as chance might throw in the way. henry this afterward when the disaster came and accordingly. the up the river two days behind the pennsylvania. we touched at greenville mississippi a couple of days out and somebody shouted the pennsylvania is blown up at ship island and a hundred and fifty lost! at napoleon arkansas the same evening we got an extra by a memphis paper which gave some it my brother and said he was not hurt. further up the river we got a later extra. my brother was again but this time as being hurt beyond help. we did not get full details of the catastrophe until we memphis. this is the sorrowful story it was six oclock on a hot summer morning. the pennsylvania was creeping along north of ship island about sixty miles below memphis on a of steam towing a which was fast being george was in the i think; the second engineer and a striker had the watch in the engine room; the second mate had the watch on deck; george black mr. wood and my brother were asleep as were also brown and the head engineer the carpenter the chief mate and one striker; captain klinefelter was in the chair and the barber was to shave him. there were a good many cabin aboard and three or four hundred deck so it was said at the time and not very many of them were astir. the wood being nearly all out of the flat now rang to come ahead full steam and the next moment four of the eight exploded with a thunderous crash and the whole forward third of the boat was toward the sky! the main part of the mass with the upon the boat again a mountain of riddled and chaotic rubbish and then after a little fire broke out. many people were flung to considerable and fell in the river; among these were mr. wood and my brother and the carpenter. the carpenter was still stretched upon his mattress when he struck the water from the boat. brown the pilot and george black chief clerk were never seen or heard of after the explosion. the chair with captain klinefelter in it and unhurt was left with its back vacancy everything forward of it floor and all had and the stupefied barber who was also unhurt stood with one toe projecting over space still stirring his lather unconsciously and saying not a word. when george saw the plunging aloft in front of him he knew what the matter was; so he muffled his face in the of his coat and pressed both hands there tightly to keep this protection in its place so that no steam could get to his nose or mouth. he had ample time to attend to these details while he was going up and returning. he presently landed on top of the unexploded forty below the former pilothouse accompanied by his wheel and a rain of other stuff and in a cloud of scalding steam. all of the many who breathed that steam none escaped. but breathed none of it. he made his way to the free air as quickly as he could; and when the steam cleared away he returned and up on the again and patiently hunted out each and every one of his chessmen and the several of his flute. by this time the fire was beginning to threaten. and filled the air. a great many had been scalded a great many crippled; the explosion had driven an iron crowbar through one mans body i think they said he was a priest. he did not die at once and his were very dreadful. a young french naval cadet of fifteen son of a french admiral was fearfully scalded but bore his manfully. both mates were badly scalded but they stood to their nevertheless. they drew the aft and they and the captain fought back the frantic herd of frightened till the wounded could be brought there and placed in safety first. when mr. wood and henry fell in the water they struck out for shore which was only a few hundred away; but henry presently said he he was not hurt what an unaccountable error! and therefore would swim back to the boat and help save the wounded. so they parted and henry returned. by this time the fire was making fierce headway and several who were imprisoned under the were begging piteously for help. all to conquer the fire proved fruitless; so the were presently thrown aside and the with axes and tried to cut the out. a striker was one of the he said he was not injured but could not free himself; and when he saw that the fire was likely to drive away the he that some one would shoot him and thus save him from the more dreadful death. the fire did drive the away and they had to listen helpless to this poor till the ended his the fire drove all into the that could be there; it was cut adrift then and it and the burning steamer down the river toward ship island. they the flat at the head of the island and there unsheltered from the blazing sun the had to remain without food or or help for their during the rest of the day. a steamer came along finally and carried the to memphis and there the most lavish assistance was at once forthcoming. by this time henry was insensible. the his and saw that they were fatal and naturally turned their main attention to who could be saved. forty of the wounded were placed upon on the floor of a great public hall and among these was henry. there the ladies of memphis came every day with and and of all and there they and nursed the wounded. all the stood there and all the medical and the rest of the town furnished money or whatever else was wanted. and memphis knew how to do all these things well; for many a disaster like the had near her and she was experienced above all other on the river in the gracious office of the good samaritan. the sight i saw when i that large hall was new and strange to me. two long of prostrate more than forty in all and every face and head a shapeless wad of loose raw cotton. it was a gruesome spectacle. i watched there six days and nights and a very melancholy experience it was. there was one daily incident which was peculiarly depressing: this was the removal of the doomed to a chamber apart. it was done in order that the morale of the other might not be injuriously affected by seeing one of their number in the the fated one was always carried out with as little stir as possible and the stretcher was always hidden from sight by a wall of but no matter: everybody knew what that cluster of bent with its muffled step and its slow movement meant; and all eyes watched it wistfully and a shudder went abreast of it like a wave. i saw many poor removed to the and saw them no more afterward. but i saw our chief mate carried thither more than once. his were frightful especially his he was clothed in linseed oil and raw cotton to his waist and nothing human. he was often out of his mind; and then his pains would make him rave and shout and sometimes shriek. then after a period of dumb exhaustion his disordered imagination would suddenly transform the great apartment into a forecastle and the hurrying throng of into the crew; and he would come to a sitting posture and shout hump yourselves hump yourselves you going to be all day getting that hatful of freight out? and supplement this explosion with a irruption or profanity which nothing could stay or stop till his crater was empty. and now and then while these possessed him he would tear off of the cotton and expose his cooked flesh to view. it was horrible. it was bad for the of course this noise and these so the tried to give him morphine to quiet him. but in his mind or out of it he would not take it. he said his wife had been by that treacherous drug and he would die before he would take it. he suspected that the were concealing it in his ordinary and in his water so he from putting either to his once when he had been without water during two sweltering days he took the dipper in his hand and the sight of the limpid fluid and the misery of his thirst him almost beyond his strength; but he mastered himself and threw it away and after that he no more to be brought near him. three times i saw him carried to the insensible and supposed to be dying; but each time he revived cursed his and to be taken back. he lived to be mate of a steamboat again. but he was the only one who went to the and returned alive. peyton a principal physician and rich in all the that go to constitute high and flawless character did all that educated judgment and trained skill could do for henry; but as the had said in the beginning his were past help. on the evening of the sixth day his wandering mind busied itself with far away and his nerveless picked at his coverlet. his hour had struck; we bore him to the poor boy. in due course i got my license. i was a pilot now full fledged. i into casual no resulting intermittent work gave place to steady and protracted time smoothly and prosperously on and i supposed and hoped that i was going to follow the river the rest of my days and die at the wheel when my mission was ended. but by and by the war came commerce was suspended my occupation was gone. i had to seek another livelihood. so i a silver miner in nevada; next a newspaper reporter; next a gold miner in california; next a reporter in san francisco; next a special correspondent in the sandwich next a roving correspondent in europe and the east; next an instructional torchbearer on the lecture platform; and finally i a scribbler of and an immovable fixture among the other of new england. in so few words have i disposed of the years that have come and gone since i last from the windows of a pilothouse. after years absence i felt a very strong desire to see the river again and the and such of the as might be left; so i resolved to go out there. i enlisted a poet for company and a stenographer to take him down and westward about the middle of april. as i to make with a view to printing i took some thought as to of procedure. i reflected that if i were recognized on the river i should not be as free to go and come talk inquire and spy around as i should be if unknown; i that it was the custom of in the old times to load up the confiding stranger with the most picturesque and admirable and put the sophisticated friend off with dull and ineffectual so i concluded that from a business point of view it would be an advantage to disguise our party with fictitious names. the idea was certainly good but it bred infinite bother; for although smith jones and johnson are easy names to remember when there is no occasion to remember them it is next to impossible to recollect them when they are wanted. how do manage to keep a alias in mind? this is a great mystery. i was innocent; and yet was seldom able to lay my hand on my new name when it was needed; and it to me that if i had had a crime on my conscience to further confuse me i could never have kept the name by me at all. evening. speaking of dress. grace and picturesqueness drop gradually out of it as one away from new york. i find that among my it no difference which direction you take the fact remains the same. whether you move north south east or west no matter: you can get up in the morning and guess how far you have come by what degree of grace and picturesqueness is by that time lacking in the of the new i do not mean of the alone but of both it may be that carriage is at the bottom of this thing; and i think it is; for there are plenty of ladies and in the provincial whose are all made by the best and of new york; yet this no perceptible effect upon the grand fact: the educated eye never those people for no there is a godless grace and snap and style about a born and bred which mere clothing cannot effect. april . this morning struck into the region of full sometimes accompanied by a mustache but only occasionally. it was odd to come upon this thick crop of an obsolete and uncomely fashion; it was like running suddenly across a forgotten acquaintance whom you had supposed dead for a generation. the goatee over a wide extent of country; and is accompanied by an ironclad belief in adam and the biblical history of creation which not from the of the afternoon. at the railway stations the carry both hands in their breeches it was observable heretofore that one hand was sometimes out of here never. this is an important fact in geography. if the determined the character of a country it would be still more important of course. heretofore all along the been often observed to scratch one shin with the other foot; here these remains of activity are wanting. this an ominous look. by and by we the region. fifty years ago the region covered the union. it is greatly restricted now. next boots to appear. not in strong force however. later away down the mississippi they the rule. they from other of the union with the mud; no doubt they will disappear from the river also when proper come in. we st. louis at ten oclock at night. at the counter of the hotel i a fictitious name with a miserable attempt at careless ease. the clerk and me in the compassionate way in which one a respectable person who is found in doubtful circumstances; then he said its all right; i know what sort of a room you want. used to clerk at the st. james in new york. an unpromising beginning for a fraudulent career. we to the supper room and met two other men whom i had known elsewhere. how odd and unfair it is: wicked go around lecturing under my de and nobody them; but when an honest man an imposture he is exposed at once. one thing plain: we must start down the river the next day if people who could not be were going to crop up at this rate: an unpalatable disappointment for we had hoped to have a week in st. louis. the southern was a good hotel and we could have had a comfortable time there. it is large and well and its do not make one cry as do those of the vast palmer house in chicago. true the were of the old silurian period and the and of the but there was refreshment in this not discomfort; for there is rest and healing in the contemplation of the most notable absence observable in the was the absence of the river man. if he was there he had taken in his sign he was in disguise. i saw there none of the swell airs and and ostentatious of money and pompous of it which used to distinguish the steamboat crowd from the crowd in the bygone days in the thronged of st. louis. in those times the principal were always populous with river men; given fifty present thirty or were likely to be from the river. but i suspected that the were thin now and the no longer an aristocracy. why in my time they used to call the barkeep bill or joe or tom and slap him on the shoulder; i watched for that. but none of these people did it. manifestly a glory that once was had dissolved and vanished away in these years. when i went up to my room i found there the young man rogers crying. rogers was not his name; neither was jones brown dexter ferguson nor thompson; but he to either of these that a body found handy in an emergency; or to any other name in fact if he perceived that you meant him. he said what is a person to do here when he a drink of water? drink this slush? here was a thing which had not changed; a score of years had not affected this waters mulatto complexion in the least; a score of would succeed no better perhaps. it comes out of the turbulent missouri and every tumblerful of it nearly an acre of land in solution. i got this fact from the bishop of the diocese. if you will let your glass stand half an hour you can separate the land from the water as easy as genesis; and then you will find them both good: the one good to eat the other good to drink. the land is very nourishing the water is thoroughly wholesome. the one hunger; the other thirst. but the do not take them separately but together as nature mixed them. when they find an inch of mud in the bottom of a glass they stir it up and then take the draught as they would gruel. it is difficult for a stranger to get used to this batter but once used to it he will prefer it to water. this is really the case. it is good for steamboating and good to drink; but it is worthless for all other except next morning we drove around town in the rain. the city but little changed. it was greatly changed but it did not seem so; because in st. louis as in london and pittsburgh you cant persuade a new thing to look new; the coal smoke turns it into an antiquity the moment you take your hand off it. the place had just about doubled its size since i was a resident of it and was now become a city of still in the solid business parts it about as it had formerly. yet i am sure there is not as much smoke in st. louis now as there used to be. the smoke used to bank itself in a dense billowy black canopy over the town and hide the sky from view. this shelter is very much thinner now; still there is a sufficiency of smoke there i think. i heard no complaint. however on the outskirts were apparent enough; notably in architecture. the fine new are noble and beautiful and modern. they stand by themselves too with green around them; whereas the of a former day are packed together in and are all of one pattern with windows all alike set in an arched framework of twisted stone; a sort of house which was handsome enough when it was there was another change the forest park. this was new to me. it is beautiful and very extensive and the excellent merit of been made mainly by nature. there are other parks and fine notably tower grove and the botanical for st. louis interested herself in such at an earlier day than did the most of our the first time i ever saw st. louis i could have bought it for six million and it was the mistake of my life that i did not do it. it was bitter now to look abroad over this domed and steepled metropolis this solid expanse of and mortar stretching away on every hand into dim and remember that i had that opportunity to go by. why i should have it to go by of course foolish and inexplicable today at a first glance; yet there were at the time to justify this course. a scotchman hon. charles augustus murray writing some or fifty years ago said the streets are narrow ill paved and ill lighted. those streets are narrow still of course; many of them are ill paved yet; but the reproach of ill lighting cannot be repeated now. the catholic new church was the only notable building then and mr. murray was confidently upon to admire it with its species of grecian portico surmounted by a kind of steeple much too diminutive in its and surmounted by sundry which the unimaginative scotchman found himself quite unable to describe; and therefore was grateful when a german tourist him out with the exclamation by they look exactly like st. louis is well equipped with stately and noble public now and the little church which the people used to be so proud of lost its importance a long time ago. still this would not surprise mr. murray if he could come back; for he the coming greatness of st. louis with strong confidence. the further we drove in our the more sensibly i realized how the city had grown since i had seen it last; in detail steadily more apparent and frequent than at first too: uniformly progress energy prosperity. but the change of was on the levee. this time a departure from the rule. half a dozen where i used to see a solid mile of this was melancholy this was woeful. the absence of the pervading and jocund steamboatman from the was he was absent because he is no more. his occupation is gone his power away he is absorbed into the common herd he at the mill a shorn samson and inconspicuous. half a dozen lifeless a mile of empty a negro fatigued with whiskey stretched asleep in a wide and soundless vacancy where the serried of commerce used to writing years ago st. louis the river abreast of the town is crowded with lying in two or three here was desolation indeed. the old old sea as one in tears comes murmuring with foamy and knocking at the vacant for his multitude of the towboat and the railroad had done their work and done it well and completely. the mighty bridge stretching along over our had done its share in the slaughter and spoliation. remains of former told me with wan satisfaction that the bridge doesnt pay. still it can be no sufficient compensation to a corpse to know that the dynamite that laid him out was not of as good quality as it had been supposed to be. the along the river front were bad: the were rather out of repair; there was a rich abundance of mud. all this was familiar and satisfying; but the ancient of and struggling of men and of freight were gone; and sabbath in their stead. the immemorial mile of cheap foul but business was dull with them; the of had departed and in their were a few scattering of ragged some drinking some drunk some nodding asleep. st. louis is a great and prosperous and advancing city; but the of it dead past resurrection. mississippi steamboating was born about ; at the end of thirty years it had grown to mighty and in less than thirty more it was dead! a strangely short life for so majestic a creature. of course it is not absolutely dead neither is a crippled octogenarian who could once jump on level ground; but as with what it was in its prime vigor mississippi steamboating may be dead. it the by reducing the to new orleans to less than a week. the have the steamboat passenger traffic by doing in two or three days what the a week in doing; and the have the traffic by dragging six or seven of stuff down the river at a time at an expense so trivial that steamboat competition was out of the question. freight and passenger remains to the this is in the hands along the two thousand miles of river between st. paul and new orleans of two or three close well fortified with capital; and by able and thoroughly businesslike management and system these make a sufficiency of money out of what is left of the once prodigious steamboating industry. i suppose that st. louis and new orleans have not materially by the change but alas for the woodyard man! he used to fringe the river all the way; his merchandise stretched from the one city to the other along the banks and he sold uncountable cords of it every year for cash on the nail; but all the scattering that are left burn coal now and the spectacle on the mississippi today is a woodpile. where now is the once woodyard man? my idea was to tarry a while in every town between st. louis and new orleans. to do this it would be necessary to go from place to place by the short packet it was an easy plan to make and would have been an easy one to follow twenty years ago but not now. there are wide between these days. i wanted to begin with the interesting old french of st. genevieve and kaskaskia sixty miles below st. louis. there was only one boat advertised for that section a grand tower packet. still one boat was enough; so we went down to look at her. she was a venerable and a fraud to boot; for she was playing herself for personal property whereas the good honest dirt was so thickly all over her that she was righteously taxable as real estate. there are in new england where her hurricane deck would be worth a hundred and fifty an acre. the soil on her forecastle was quite good the new crop of wheat was already springing from the in protected the companionway was of a dry sandy character and would have been well suited for with a southern exposure and a little the soil of the boiler deck was thin and rocky but good enough for grazing a colored boy was on watch here nobody else visible. we gathered from him that this calm craft would go as advertised if she got her trip; if she didnt get it she would wait for it. bless you no boss. she aint she only come in dis he was uncertain as to when she might get her trip but thought it might be tomorrow or maybe next day. this would not answer at all; so we had to give up the novelty of sailing down the river on a farm. we had one more arrow in our quiver: a vicksburg packet the gold dust was to leave at p.m. we took passage in her for memphis and gave up the idea of stopping off here and there as being impracticable. she was neat clean and comfortable. we on the boiler deck and bought some cheap literature to kill time with. the vender was a venerable irishman with a benevolent face and a tongue that worked easily in the socket and from him we learned that he had lived in st. louis years and had never been across the river during that period. then he into a very flowing lecture filled with classic names and which was quite wonderful for fluency until the fact rather apparent that this was not the first time nor perhaps the fiftieth that the speech had been he was a good deal of a character and much better company than the sappy literature he was selling. a random remark and beer brought this nugget of information out of him they dont drink it sir. they cant drink it sir. give an irishman lager for a month and a dead man. an irishman is lined with copper and the beer it. but whiskey the copper and is the saving of him sir. at eight oclock promptly we backed out and crossed the river. as we crept toward the shore in the thick darkness a blinding glory of white electric light burst suddenly from our forecastle and lit up the water and the as with a noonday glare. another big change this no more flickering smoky ineffectual now: their day is past. next instead of calling out a score of hands to man the stage a couple of men and a hatful of steam lowered it from the derrick where it was suspended it it in just the right spot and the whole thing was over and done with before a mate in the olden time could have got his adjusted to begin the preparatory services. why this new and simple method of handling the was not thought of when the first steamboat was built is a mystery which one to realize what a slug the average human being is. we finally got away at two in the morning and when i turned out at six we were rounding to at a rocky point where there was an old stone warehouse at any rate the of it; two or three decayed were near by in the shelter of the leafy but there were no of human or other animal life to be seen. i if i had forgotten the river; for i had no recollection whatever of this place; the shape of the river too was unfamiliar; there was nothing in sight anywhere that i could remember ever seen before. i was surprised disappointed and annoyed. we put ashore a lady and gentleman and two ladylike young together with sundry a strange place for such folk! no carriage was waiting. the party moved off as if they had not expected any and struck down a winding country road afoot. but the mystery was when we got under way again; for these people were evidently bound for a large town which lay shut in behind a towhead i.e. new island a couple of miles below this landing. i remember that town; i place it call its name. so i lost part of my temper. i suspected that it might be st. genevieve and so it proved to be. observe what this eccentric river had been about: it had built up this huge useless towhead directly in front of this town cut off its river communications it away completely and made a country town of it. it is a fine old place too and deserved a better fate. it was settled by the french and is a relic of a time when one could travel from the of the mississippi to quebec and be on french territory and under french rule all the way. presently i to the hurricane deck and cast a longing glance toward the pilothouse. after a close study of the face of the pilot on watch i was satisfied that i had never seen him before; so i went up there. the pilot me; i the pilot. these customary over i sat down on the high bench and he faced about and went on with his work. every detail of the pilothouse was familiar to me with one exception a largemouthed tube under the i puzzled over that thing a considerable time; then gave up and what it was for. it was another good contrivance which ought to have been half a century sooner. so i was thinking when the pilot if you take an interest in such things i can tell you what all these things are for. this putting his hand on a rope is to sound the this putting his hand on a bell is to call the this one the is to call the captain and so he went on touching one object after another and off his tranquil spool of i had never felt so like a passenger before. i him with emotion for each new fact and wrote it down in my notebook. the pilot warmed to his opportunity and to load me up in the good way. at times i was afraid he was going to rupture his invention; but it always stood the strain and he through all right. he by easy into of the marvelous of one sort and another and backed them up with some pretty gigantic for instance do you see that little boulder sticking out of the water yonder? well when i first came on the river that was a solid ridge of rock over sixty high and two miles long. all washed away but that. this with a sigh. i had a mighty impulse to destroy him but it to me that killing in any ordinary way would be too good for him. once when an craft with a vast slanting aloft on the end of a beam was steaming by in the distance he indifferently drew attention to it as one might to an object grown wearisome through familiarity and observed that it was an alligator boat. well not now because the government them down. but they used to be. not everywhere; but in favorite here and there where the river is wide and plum point and stack island and so on they call alligator years ago yes in very low water; there was hardly a trip then that we didnt get aground on it to me that i should certainly have to get out my tomahawk. however i restrained myself and said yes it was one of the main about piloting. it was so hard to tell anything about the water; the damned things shift around so never lie still five minutes at a time. you can tell a straight off by the look of it; you can tell a break; you can tell a thats all easy; but an alligator reef doesnt show up worth anything. nine times in ten you cant tell where the water is; and when you do see where it is like as not it aint there when you get there the have around so meantime. of course there were some few that could judge of alligator water nearly as well as they could of any other kind but they had to have natural talent for it; it wasnt a thing a body could learn you had to be born with it. let me see: there was ben and beck jolly and squire bell and horace and major downing and john stevenson and billy gordon and jim brady and george and billy all a alligator they could tell alligator water as far as another christian could tell whiskey. read it? ah they though! i only wish i had as many as they could read alligator water a mile and a half off. yes and it paid them to do it too. a good alligator pilot could always get fifteen hundred a month. nights other people had to lay up for but those never laid up for they never laid up for anything but fog. they could smell the best alligator water it was said; i dont know whether it was so or not and i think a got his hands full enough if he sticks to just what he himself without going around backing up other peoples though theres a plenty that aint backward about doing it as long as they can roust out something wonderful to tell. which is not the style of robert by as much as three fathom maybe my! was this rob this mustached and stately slim enough cub in my time. how he improved in comeliness in year and in the noble art of his after these i said aloud i should think that dredging out the wouldnt have done much good because they could come back again right away. if you had had as much experience of as i have you wouldnt talk like that. you dredge an alligator once and convinced. its the last you hear of him. he wouldnt come back for pie. if theres one thing that an alligator is more down on than another its being besides they were not simply out of the way; the most of the scoopful were scooped aboard; they them into the hold; and when they had got a trip they took them to orleans to the government works. why to make out of their all the government shoes are made of alligator hide. it the best shoes in the world. they last five years and they wont absorb water. the alligator fishery is a government monopoly. all the are government property just like the you cut down a and government you fifty you kill an alligator and up you go for misprision of treason lucky duck if they dont hang you too. and they will if a democrat. the buzzard is the sacred bird of the south and you cant touch him; the alligator is the sacred bird of the government and youve got to let him alone. just for police duty nothing more. they merely go up and down now and then. the present generation of know them as easy as a burglar a roundsman; when they see one coming they break camp and go for the woods. after and and the alligator business he easily and comfortably into the historical vein and told of some tremendous of of his acquaintance dwelling at special length upon a certain extraordinary performance of his chief favorite among this distinguished fleet and then that boat was the cyclone last trip she ever made she sunk that very trip captain was tom the most immortal liar that ever i struck. he ever seem to tell the truth in any kind of weather. why he would make you fairly shudder. he was the most scandalous liar! i left him finally; i stand it. the proverb like master like man; and if you stay with that kind of a man come under suspicion by and by just as sure as you live. he paid wages; but said i whats wages when your in danger? so i let the wages go and froze to my reputation. and never it. worth everything aint it? thats the way i look at it. he had more selfish organs than any seven men in the world all packed in the of his skull of course where they they weighed down the back of his head so that it made his nose tilt up in the air. people thought it was vanity but it wasnt it was malice. if you only saw his foot youd take him to be nineteen high but he wasnt; it was because his foot was out of drawing. he was intended to be nineteen high no doubt if his foot was made first but he didnt get there; he was only five ten. thats what he was and thats what he is. you take the out of him and hell shrink to the size of your hat; you take the malice out of him and hell disappear. that cyclone was a rattler to go and the thing to steer that ever the waters. set her amidships in a big river and just let her go; it was all you had to do. she would hold herself on a star all night if you let her alone. you ever feel her rudder. it wasnt any more labor to steer her than it is to count the republican vote in a south carolina election. one morning just at daybreak the last trip she ever made they took her rudder aboard to mend it; i didnt know anything about it; i backed her out from the woodyard and went down the river all serene. when i had gone about miles and made four horribly crooked yes old tom on the roof and to find fault with me for running such a dark night never mind what i said twas as dark as egypt now though pretty soon the moon to rise and you mean the sun because you out just at break of look here! was this before you quitted the captain on account of his lying or he stepped back from the wheel swabbing away his perspiration and said here! calling me by name you take her and lie a while at it than i am. trying to play yourself for a stranger and an innocent! why i knew you before you had spoken seven words; and i made up my mind to find out what was your little game. it was to draw me out. well i let you didnt i? now take the wheel and finish the watch; and next time play fair and you wont have to work your passage. thus ended the business. and not six hours out from st. louis! but i had a privilege any way for i had been itching to get my hands on the wheel from the beginning. i to have forgotten the river but i forgotten how to steer a steamboat nor how to enjoy it either. the scenery from st. louis to cairo two hundred miles is varied and beautiful. the were clothed in the fresh foliage of spring now and were a gracious and worthy setting for the broad river flowing between. our trip auspiciously with a perfect day as to breeze and sunshine and our boat threw the miles out behind her with satisfactory despatch. we found a railway intruding at chester illinois; chester also a penitentiary now and is otherwise marching on. at grand tower too there was a railway; and another at cape the former town its name from a huge squat pillar of rock which up out of the water on the missouri side of the river a piece of fanciful handiwork and is one of the most picturesque of the scenery of that region. for nearer or the tower the bake oven so perhaps because it does not powerfully resemble anybody bake oven; and the tea table this latter a great mass of rock with diminishing wineglass stem some fifty or sixty above the river beside a and precipice and sufficiently like a to answer for anybody devil or christian. away down the river we have the elbow and the racecourse and lots of other property of his which i cannot now call to mind. the town of grand tower was evidently a place than it had been in old times but it to need some here and there and a new coat of whitewash all over. still it was pleasant to me to see the old coat once more. uncle our second officer said the place had been suffering from high water and consequently was not looking its best now. but he said it was not strange that it didnt waste whitewash on itself for more lime was made there and of a better quality than anywhere in the west; and added on a dairy farm you never can get any milk for your coffee nor any sugar for it on a sugar plantation; and it is against sense to go to a lime town to hunt for whitewash. in my own experience i knew the first two to be true; and also that people who sell candy dont care for candy; therefore there was plausibility in uncle final observation that people who make lime run more to religion than whitewash. uncle said further that grand tower was a great center and a prospering place. cape is situated on a hillside and a handsome appearance. there is a great jesuit school for at the foot of the town by the river. uncle said it had as high a reputation for thoroughness as any similar institution in missouri! there was another college higher up on an airy summit a bright new edifice picturesquely and peculiarly towered and a sort of gigantic with the all complete. uncle said that cape was the athens of missouri and contained several besides those already and all of them on a religious basis of one kind or another. he directed my attention to what he the strong and pervasive religious look of the town but i could not see that it more religious than the other hill with the same slope and built of the same kind of often make people see more than really uncle been thirty years a mate on the river. he is a man of practical sense and a level head; observed; had much experience of one sort and another; also just a perceptible dash of poetry in his composition an easy gift of speech a thick growl in his voice and an oath or two where he can get at them when the of his office require a spiritual lift. he is a mate of the blessed kind; and goes gravely damning around when there is work to the fore in a way to mellow the heart with sweet soft for the vanished days that shall come no more. git up there you! going to be all day? why you say you was petrified in your hind legs before you shipped! he is a steady man with his crew; kind and just but firm; so they like him and stay with him. he is still in the slouchy garb of the old generation of mates; but next trip the anchor line will have him in uniform a natty blue naval uniform with brass buttons along with all the of the line and then he will be a totally different style of scenery from what he is now. on the mississippi! it beats all the other put together for surprise. still there is another surprise that it was not made fifty years ago. it is so manifestly sensible that it might have been thought of earlier one would suppose. during fifty years out there the innocent passenger in need of help and information been mistaking the mate for the cook and the captain for the barber and being roughly entertained for it too. but his are ended now. and the greatly improved aspect of the staff is another advantage by the period. down the bend below cape they used to call it bend; plain sailing and plenty of water in it always; about the only place in the upper river that a new cub was to take a boat through in low water. thebes at the head of the grand chain and commerce at the foot of it were easily rememberable as they had not conspicuous alteration. nor the chain either in the nature of things; for it is a chain of sunken admirably arranged to capture and kill on bad nights. a good many steamboat lie buried there out of sight; among the rest my first friend the paul jones; she her bottom out and went down like a pot so the historian told me uncle he said she had a gray mare aboard and a preacher. to me this sufficiently for the disaster; as it did of course to who added but there are many ignorant people who would scoff at such a matter and call it superstition. but you will always notice that they are people who have never traveled with a gray mare and a preacher. i went down the river once in such company. we grounded at bloody island; we grounded at hanging dog; we grounded just below this same commerce; we jolted beaver dam rock; we hit one of the worst in the graveyard behind goose island; we had a roustabout in a fight; we burnt a boiler; broke a shaft; a flue; and went into cairo with nine of water in the hold may have been more may have been less. i remember it as if it were yesterday. the men lost their with terror. they painted the mare blue in sight of town and threw the preacher overboard or we should not have at all. the preacher was fished out and saved. he acknowledged himself that he had been to blame. i remember it all as if it were yesterday. that this combination of preacher and gray mare should breed calamity strange and at first glance unbelievable; but the fact is fortified by so much unassailable proof that to doubt is to dishonor reason. i myself remember a case where a captain was by numerous against taking a gray mare and a preacher with him but in his purpose in spite of all that could be said; and the same day it may have been the next and some say it was though i think it was the same day he got drunk and fell down the hatchway and was borne to his home a corpse. this is literally true. no vestige of hat island is left now; every shred of it is washed away. i do not even remember what part of the river it used to be in except that it was between st. louis and cairo somewhere. it was a bad region all around and about hat island in early days. a farmer who lived on the illinois shore there said that had left their bones strung along within sight from his house. between st. louis and cairo the steamboat average one to the mile; two hundred altogether. i could recognize big from commerce down. beaver dam rock was out in the middle of the river now and throwing a prodigious break; it used to be close to the shore and went down outside of it. a big island that used to be away out in retired to the missouri shore and do not go near it any more. the island jacket pattern is down to a wedge now and is booked for early destruction. goose island is all gone but a little dab the size of a steamboat. the perilous graveyard among whose numberless we used to pick our way so slowly and gingerly is far away from the channel now and a terror to nobody. one of the formerly the two is gone entirely; the other which used to lie close to the illinois shore is now on the missouri side a mile away; it is joined solidly to the shore and it a sharp eye to see where the seam is but it is illinois ground yet and the people who live on it have to ferry themselves over and work the illinois roads and pay illinois singular state of things! near the mouth of the river several were missing washed away. cairo was still there easily visible across the long flat point upon whose further verge it but we had to steam a long way around to get to it. night fell as we were going out of the upper river and meeting the of the ohio. we dashed along without anxiety; for the hidden rock which used to lie right in the way moved up stream a long distance out of the channel; or rather about one county gone into the river from the missouri point and the cairo point made down and added to its long tongue of territory correspondingly. the mississippi is a just and equitable river; it never one mans farm overboard without building a new farm just like it for that mans neighbor. this down hard feelings. going into cairo we came near killing a steamboat which paid no attention to our whistle and then tried to cross our by doing some strong backing we saved him; which was a great loss for he would have made good literature. cairo is a brisk town now; and is substantially built and a city look about it which is in noticeable contrast to its former estate as per mr. portrait of it. however it was already building with when i had seen it last which was when colonel now general grant was drilling his first command there. uncle the and have done a good work in cairo as well as the brick cairo a heavy railroad and river trade and her situation at the junction of the two great is so advantageous that she cannot well help prospering. when i turned out in the morning we had columbus kentucky and were approaching a pretty town on a handsome hill. is in a rich tobacco region and formerly a great and lucrative trade in that staple collecting it there in her from a large area of country and shipping it by boat; but uncle she built a railway to facilitate this commerce a little more and he it it the wrong way took the bulk of the trade out of her hands by it along the line without gathering it at her talk to run upon the war now for we were getting down into the upper edge of the former by this time. columbus was just behind us so there was a good deal said about the famous battle of belmont. several of the had seen active service in the mississippi i gathered that they found themselves sadly out of their element in that kind of business at first but afterward got accustomed to it reconciled to it and more or less at home in it. one of our had his first war experience in the belmont fight as a pilot on a boat in the confederate service. i had often had a curiosity to know how a green hand might feel in his maiden battle all solitary and alone on high in a pilot house a target for tom dick and harry and nobody at his elbow to shame him from showing the white feather when grew hot and perilous around him; so to me his story was valuable it filled a gap for me which all had left till that time empty. it was the th of november. the fight at seven in the morning. i was on the r. h. w. hill. took over a load of troops from columbus. came back and took over a battery of artillery. my partner said he was going to see the fight; wanted me to go along. i said no i wasnt anxious i would look at it from the pilothouse. he said i was a coward and left. that fight was an awful sight. general made his men strip their off and throw them in a pile and said now follow me to hell or victory! i heard him say that from the pilothouse; and then he in at the head of his troops. old general pillow with his white hair mounted on a white horse sailed in too leading his troops as lively as a boy. by and by the chased the back and here they came! tearing along everybody for himself and devil take the hindmost! and down under the bank they scrambled and took shelter. i was sitting with my legs hanging out of the pilothouse window. all at once i noticed a whizzing sound passing my ear. it was a bullet. i didnt stop to think about anything i just tilted over backwards and landed on the floor and staid there. the came booming around. three went through the chimney; one ball took off the corner of the pilothouse; were screaming and all around. mighty warm times i wished i come. i lay there on the pilothouse floor while the came faster and faster. i crept in behind the big stove in the middle of the pilothouse. presently a came through the stove and just grazed my head and cut my hat. i it was time to go away from there. the captain was on the roof with a redheaded major from memphis a man. i heard him say he wanted to leave here but that pilot is i crept over to the starboard side to pull the bell to set her back; raised up and took a look and i saw about fifteen shot through the window had come so lively i noticed them. i out on the water and the spattering shot were like a hailstorm. i thought best to get out of that place. i went down the pilothouse guy head first not first but head first slid down before i struck the deck the captain said we must leave there. so i up the guy and got on the floor again. about that time they collared my partner and were bringing him up to the pilothouse between two somebody had said i was he put his head in and saw me on the floor reaching for the backing he said oh hell he aint shot and away from the men who had him by the collar and ran below. we were there until three oclock in the afternoon and then got away all right. the next time i saw my partner i said now come out be honest and tell me the truth. where did you go when you went to see that battle? he i went down in the hold. all through that fight i was scared nearly to death. i hardly knew anything i was so frightened; but you see nobody knew that but me. next day general polk sent for me and me for my bravery and gallant conduct. i never said anything i let it go at that. i it wasnt so but it was not for me to contradict a general officer. pretty soon after that i was sick and used up and had to go off to the hot when there i got a good many letters from saying they wanted me to come back. i declined because i wasnt well enough or strong enough; but i kept still and kept the reputation i had made. a plain story straightforwardly told; but told me that that pilot had gilded that scare of his in spots; that his subsequent career in the war was proof of it. we struck down through the chute of island no. and i went below and fell into conversation with a passenger a handsome man with easy carriage and an intelligent face. we were approaching island no. a place so celebrated during the war. this home was on the main shore in its neighborhood. i had some talk with him about the war times; but presently the discourse fell upon for in no part of the south the vendetta more briskly or held out longer between warring than in this particular region. this gentleman said theres been more than one feud around here in old times but i reckon the worst one was between the and the nobody dont know now what the first quarrel was about its so long ago; the and the dont know if theres any of them living which i dont think there is. some it was about a horse or a cow anyway it was a little matter; the money in it wasnt of no consequence none in the world both was rich. the thing could have been fixed up easy enough; but no that wouldnt do. rough words had been and so nothing but blood could fix it up after that. that horse or cow whichever it was cost sixty years of killing and crippling! every year or so somebody was shot on one side or the other; and as fast as one generation was laid out their sons took up the feud and kept it agoing. and its just as i say; they went on shooting each other year in and year out making a kind of a religion of it you see till done forgot long ago what it was all about. wherever a caught a watson or a watson caught a one of em was going to get hurt only question was which of them got the drop on the other. shoot one another down right in the presence of the family. they didnt hunt for each other but when they to meet they puffed and begun. men would shoot would shoot men. a man shot a boy twelve years old on him in the woods and didnt give him no chance. if he had a given him a chance the boyd a shot him. both to the same church everybody around here is religious; through all this fifty or sixty years fuss both was there every sunday to worship. they lived each side of the line and the church was at a landing compromise. half the church and half the aisle was in kentucky the other half in tennessee. youd see the drive up all in their sunday clothes men and and file up the aisle and set down quiet and orderly one lot on the tennessee side of the church and the other on the kentucky side; and the men and would lean their up against the wall handy and then all hands would join in with the prayer and praise; though they say the man next the aisle didnt kneel down along with the rest of the family; kind of stood guard. i dont know; never was at that church in my life; but i remember that thats what used to be said. twenty or years ago one of the feud caught a young man of nineteen out and him. dont remember whether it was the and or one of the other but anyway this young man rode up steamboat laying there at the time and the first thing he saw was a whole gang of the enemy. he down behind a woodpile but they rode around and begun on him he firing back and they galloping and and yelling and banging away with all their might. think he wounded a couple of them; but they closed in on him and chased him into the river; and as he swum along down stream they along the bank and kept on shooting at him; and when he struck shore he was dead. windy marshall told me about it. he saw it. he was captain of the boat. years ago the was so thinned out that the old man and his two sons concluded leave the country. they to take steamboat just above no. ; but the got wind of it; and they just as the two young was walking up the companionway with their on their arms. the fight begun then and they never got no further both of them after that old got into trouble with the man that run the ferry and the ferryman got the worst of it and but his shot old through and through filled him full of and ended him. the country gentleman who told me these things had been in ease and comfort was a man of good parts and was college bred. his loose grammar was the fruit of careless habit not ignorance. this habit among educated men in the west is not universal but it is prevalent prevalent in the certainly if not in the and to a degree which one cannot help and at. i heard a westerner who would be a highly educated man in any country say never mind it dont make no difference anyway. a lifelong resident who was present heard it but it made no impression upon her. she was able to recall the fact afterward when of it; but she that the words had not upon her ear at the time a confession which that if educated people can hear such blasphemous grammar from such a source and be unconscious of the deed the crime must be tolerably common so common that the general ear become dulled by familiarity with it and is no longer alert no longer sensitive to such no one in the world grammar; no one ever written it no one either in the world or out of it taking the for evidence on the latter point; therefore it would not be fair to exact grammatical perfection from the peoples of the valley; but they and all other peoples may justly be required to refrain from knowingly and purposely their grammar. i found the river greatly changed at island no. . the island which i was some three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide heavily timbered and lay near the kentucky shore within two hundred of it i should say. now however one had to hunt for it with a spyglass. nothing was left of it but an insignificant little tuft and this was no longer near the kentucky shore; it was clear over against the opposite shore a mile away. in war times the island had been an important place for it the situation; and being heavily fortified there was no getting by it. it lay between the upper and lower of the union and kept them separate until a junction was finally effected across the missouri neck of land; but the island being itself joined to that neck now the wide river is without obstruction. in this region the river from kentucky into tennessee back into missouri then back into kentucky and thence into tennessee again. so a mile or two of missouri sticks over into tennessee. the town of new madrid was looking very unwell; but otherwise unchanged from its former condition and aspect. its of were still grouped in the same old flat plain and by the same old it was as tranquil as formerly and apparently had neither grown nor diminished in size. it was said that the recent high water had it and damaged its this was surprising news; for in low water the river bank is very high there fifty and in my day an overflow had always been considered an impossibility. this present flood of will doubtless be celebrated in the history for several before a deluge of like magnitude shall be seen. it put all the unprotected low under water from cairo to the mouth; it broke down the in a great many on both sides of the river; and in some south when the flood was at its highest the mississippi was seventy miles wide! a number of were lost and the destruction of property was fearful. the were destroyed washed away and shelterless men and cattle forced to take refuge on scattering here and there in field and forest and wait in peril and suffering until the put in commission by the national and local and by newspaper enterprise could come and rescue them. the of of people were under water for and the must have starved by the hundred if succor had not been promptly for a detailed and interesting description of the great flood written on board of the new orleans see appendix a the water had been falling during a considerable time now yet as a rule we found the banks still under water. we met two at new madrid. two in sight at once! an infrequent spectacle now in the lonesome mississippi. the loneliness of this solemn stupendous flood is impressive and depressing. league after league and still league after league it its chocolate tide along between its solid forest its almost untenanted with seldom a sail or a moving object of any kind to disturb the surface and break the monotony of the blank watery solitude; and so the day goes the night comes and again the day and still the same night after night and day after day majestic unchanging sameness of serenity repose tranquillity lethargy vacancy symbol of eternity realization of the heaven pictured by priest and prophet and for by the good and thoughtless! immediately after the war of to come to america from england; scattering at first then a sort of procession of them a procession which kept up its plodding patient march through the land during many many years. each tourist took and went home and published a book a book which was usually calm truthful reasonable kind; but which just the reverse to our a glance at these us that in certain of its the mississippi no change since those it but remains today about as it was then. the produced in those foreign by these were not all formed on one pattern of course; they had to be various along at first because the earlier were obliged to originate their whereas in older one can always borrow from and mind you are among the things in the world to manufacture out of whole cloth; it is easier to manufacture seven than one emotion. captain basil hall. r.n. writing years ago here i caught the first glimpse of the object i had so long wished to behold and felt myself amply at that moment for all the trouble i had experienced in coming so far; and stood looking at the river flowing past till it was too dark to distinguish anything. but it was not till i had the same spot a dozen times that i came to a right comprehension of the grandeur of the scene. following are mrs. she is writing a few later in the same year and is coming in at the mouth of the mississippi the first indication of our approach to land was the appearance of this mighty river pouring forth its muddy mass of waters and mingling with the deep blue of the mexican gulf. i never beheld a scene so utterly desolate as this entrance of the mississippi. had dante seen it he might have drawn of another borgia from its one only object itself above the waters; this is the mast of a vessel long since wrecked in to cross the bar and it still a dismal witness of the destruction that been and a boding prophet of that which is to come. of hon. charles augustus murray near st. louis seven years later it is only when you ascend the mighty current for fifty or a hundred miles and use the eye of imagination as well as that of nature that you begin to understand all his might and majesty. you see him a boundless valley bearing along in his course the of his thousand over the shattered forest here carrying away large masses of soil with all their growth and there forming destined at some future period to be the residence of man; and while indulging in this prospect it is then time for reflection to suggest that the current before you through two or three thousand miles and yet to travel one thousand three hundred more before reaching its ocean destination. receive now the of captain r.n. author of the sea tales writing in three years after mr. murray never perhaps in the of was there an instance of a century of such unvarying and unmitigated crime as is to be collected from the history of the turbulent and bloodstained mississippi. the stream itself as if appropriate for the deeds which have been committed. it is not like most beautiful to the sight bestowing fertility in its course; not one that the eye to dwell upon as it along nor can you wander upon its banks or trust yourself without danger to its stream. it is a furious rapid desolating torrent loaded with alluvial soil; and few of those who are received into its waters ever rise again footnote there was a foolish superstition of some little prevalence in that day that the mississippi would neither buoy up a swimmer nor permit a body to rise to the surface. or can support themselves long upon its surface without assistance from some friendly log. it the and most uneatable of fish such as the catfish and such genus and as you descend its banks are occupied with the fetid alligator while the panther at its edge in the almost impervious to man. pouring its impetuous waters through wild covered with of little value except for firewood it down whole in its course which disappear in tumultuous confusion whirled away by the stream now loaded with the masses of soil which nourished their roots often blocking up and changing for a time the channel of the river which as if in anger at its being opposed and the whole country round; and as soon as it its way through its former channel in every direction the of the forest upon whose the bird will never again perch or the raccoon the opossum or the squirrel climb as traps to the adventurous of its waters by steam who borne down upon these concealed which pierce through the very often have not time to steer for and gain the shore before they sink to the bottom. there are no pleasing connected with the great common sewer of the western america which out its mud into the mexican gulf polluting the clear blue sea for many miles beyond its mouth. it is a river of desolation; and instead of you like other beautiful of an angel which for the benefit of man you imagine it a devil whose have been only overcome by the wonderful power of steam. it is pretty crude literature for a man accustomed to handling a pen; still as a panorama of the sent through this noted breast by the aspect and of the great common sewer it a value. a value though marred in the matter of statistics by for the catfish is a plenty good enough fish for anybody and there are no that are impervious to man. later still comes alexander of the middle temple barrister at law with a better digestion and no catfish dinner aboard and as the mississippi! it was with indescribable that i first felt myself afloat upon its waters. how often in my schoolboy and in my waking afterwards had my imagination pictured to itself the lordly stream rolling with tumultuous current through the boundless region to which it given its name and gathering into itself in its course to the ocean the tributary waters of almost every latitude in the temperate zone! here it was then in its reality and i at length steaming against its tide. i upon it with that reverence with which everyone must regard a great feature of external nature. so much for the the one and all remark upon the deep brooding loneliness and desolation of the vast river. captain basil hall who saw it at sometimes we along of twenty or thirty miles without seeing a single habitation. an artist in search of for a painting of the deluge would here have found them in abundance. the first shall be last just two hundred years ago the old original first and of all the foreign pioneer head of the procession ended his weary and tedious down the solemn of the great river la salle whose name will last as long as the river itself shall last. we quote from mr. and now they their end. on the sixth of april the river divided itself into three broad channels. la salle that of the west and that of the east; while took the middle passage. as he down the turbid current between the low and marshy the brackish water changed to brine and the breeze grew fresh with the salt breath of the sea. then the broad bosom of the great gulf opened on his sight tossing its restless limitless voiceless lonely as when born of chaos without a sail without a sign of life. then on a spot of solid ground la salle a column bearing the arms of france; the were under arms; and while the new england and their on in wondering silence they chanted the te the and the domine then whilst the musketry and rejoicing burst forth the victorious discoverer planted the column and made proclamation in a loud voice taking formal possession of the river and the vast watered by it in the name of the king. the column bore this inscription louis le grand roy de france de le . new orleans intended to fittingly celebrate this present year the bicentennial anniversary of this illustrious event; but when the time came all her and surplus money were required in other for the flood was upon the land then making havoc and devastation everywhere. all day we swung along down the river and had the stream almost wholly to ourselves. formerly at such a stage of the water we should have acres of lumber rafts and dozens of big coal also occasional little peddling along from farm to farm with the family on board; possibly a random scow bearing a humble hamlet and co. on an itinerant dramatic trip. but these were all absent. far along in the day we saw one steamboat; just one and no more. she was lying at rest in the shade within the wooded mouth of the river. the spyglass revealed the fact that she was for me or he was for me whichever you prefer. as this was the first time i had ever this species of honor it excusable to mention it and at the same time call the attention of the authorities to the tardiness of my recognition of it. noted a big change in the river at island . it was a very large island and used to be out toward midstream; but it is joined fast to the main shore now and retired from business as an island. as we famous and formidable plum point darkness fell but that was nothing to shudder about in these modern times. for now the national government turned the mississippi into a sort of torchlight procession. in the head of every crossing and in the foot of every crossing the government set up a lamp. you are never entirely in the dark now; there is always a beacon in sight either before you or behind you or abreast. one might almost say that have been squandered there. dozens of are lighted which were not shoal when they were and have never been shoal since; so plain too and also so straight that a steamboat can take herself through them without any help after she been through once. in such are of course not wasted; it is much more convenient and comfortable for a pilot to hold on them than on a spread of formless blackness that wont stay still; and money is saved to the boat at the same time for she can of course make more miles with her rudder amidships than she can with it squared across her stern and holding her back. but this thing the romance out of piloting to a large extent. it and some other things together have all the romance out of it. for instance the peril from is not now what it once was. the go up and down in these days pulling the teeth; they have rooted out all the old which made many so formidable; and they allow no new to collect. formerly if your boat got away from you on a black night and broke for the woods it was an anxious time with you; so was it also when you were groping your way through solidified darkness in a narrow chute; but all that is changed now you flash out your electric light transform night into day in the twinkling of an eye and your and are at an end. horace and george have the and laid out the by compass; they have a lamp to go with the chart and have patented the whole. with these one may run in the fog now with considerable security and with a confidence unknown in the old days. with these abundant the banishment of plenty of daylight in a box and ready to be turned on whenever needed and a chart and compass to fight the fog with piloting at a good stage of water is now nearly as safe and simple as driving stage and is hardly more than three times as romantic. and now in these new days these days of infinite change the anchor line have raised the captain above the pilot by giving him the bigger wages of the two. this was going far but they have not stopped there. they have decreed that the pilot shall remain at his post and stand his watch clear through whether the boat be under way or tied up to the shore. we that were once the of the river cant go to bed now as we used to do and sleep while a hundred tons of freight are lugged aboard; no we must sit in the pilothouse; and keep awake too. verily we are being treated like a parcel of mates and the government taken away the romance of our calling; the company taken away its state and dignity. plum point as it had always by night with the exception that now there were to mark the and also a lot of other on the point and along its shore; these latter glinting from the fleet of the united river commission and from a village which the have built on the land for and for the of the service. the military of the commission have taken upon their the job of making the mississippi over again a job in size by only the original job of it. they are building here and there to deflect the current; and to confine it in narrower bounds; and other to make it stay there; and for unnumbered miles along the mississippi they are felling the for fifty back with the purpose of shaving the bank down to mark with the slant of a house roof and ballasting it with and in many they have protected the wasting with of piles. one who the mississippi will promptly aver not aloud but to himself that ten thousand river with the mines of the world at their back cannot tame that lawless stream cannot curb it or confine it cannot say to it go here or go there and make it obey; cannot save a shore which it cannot bar its path with an obstruction which it will not tear down dance over and laugh at. but a discreet man will not put these things into spoken words; for the west point have not their anywhere; they know all that can be known of their abstruse science; and so since they conceive that they can fetter and handcuff that river and boss him it is but wisdom for the unscientific man to keep still lie low and wait till they do it. captain with his done a work at the mouth of the mississippi which clearly impossible; so we do not feel full confidence now to prophesy against like otherwise one would pipe out and say the commission might as well bully the in their and undertake to make them behave as try to bully the mississippi into right and reasonable conduct. i uncle concerning this and cognate and i give here the result stenographically reported and therefore to be on as being full and correct; except that i have here and there left out which were addressed to the men such as where in are you going with that barrel now? and which to me to break the flow of the written statement without compensating by to its information or its clearness. not that i have to strike out all such i have removed only those which were obviously irrelevant; wherever one which i felt any question about i have it to let it remain. as long as i have been mate of a steamboat thirty years i have watched this river and studied it. maybe i could have learnt more about it at west point but if i believe it i wish i may be what are you sucking your there for ? collar that of four years at west point and plenty of and schooling will learn a man a good deal i reckon but it wont learn him the river. you turn one of those little european over to this commission with its hard bottom and clear water and it would just be a holiday job for them to wall it and pile it and dike it and tame it down and boss it around and make it go wherever they wanted it to and stay where they put it and do just as they said every time. but this aint that kind of a river. they have in here with big confidence and the best in the world; but they are going to get left. what does ecclesiastes vii. say? enough to knock their little game dont it? now you look at their once. there at island in the upper river they wanted the water to go one way the water wanted to go another. so they put up a stone wall. but what does the river care for a stone wall? when it got ready it just through it. maybe they can build another that will stay; that is up there but not down here they cant. down here in the lower river they drive some to turn the water away from the shore and stop it from slicing off the bank; very well dont it go straight over and cut somebody bank? certainly. are they going to peg all the banks? why they could buy ground and build a new mississippi they are pegging bulletin towhead now. it wont do any good. if the river got a mortgage on that island it will foreclose sure or no away down yonder they have driven two of piles straight through the middle of a dry bar half a mile long which is forty foot out of the water when the river is low. what do you reckon that is for? if i know i wish i may land in hump yourself you son of an undertaker! out with that now lively lively! and just look at what they are trying to do down there at bend. theres been a cutoff in that section and vicksburg is left out in the cold. its a country town now. the river in below it; and a boat cant go up to the town except in high water. well they are going to build in the bend opposite the foot of and throw the water over and cut off the foot of the island and plow down into an old ditch where the river used to be in ancient times; and they think they can persuade the water around that way and get it to strike in above vicksburg as it used to do and fetch the town back into the world again. that is they are going to take this whole mississippi and twist it around and make it run several miles up stream. well youve got to admire men that deal in of that size and can tote them around without but you havent got to believe they can do such have you! and yet you aint absolutely obliged to believe they cant. i reckon the safe way where a man can afford it is to copper the operation and at the same time buy enough property in vicksburg to square you up in case they win. government is doing a deal for the mississippi now spending loads of money on her. when there used to be four thousand and ten thousand acres of and rafts and trading there wasnt a lantern from st. paul to new orleans and the were than on a back; and now when theres three dozen and nary barge or raft government snatched out all the and lit up the like broadway and a as safe on the river as shed be in heaven. and i reckon that by the time there aint any left at all the commission will have the old thing all reorganized and out and in and up to a degree that will make navigation just simply perfect and absolutely safe and profitable; and all the days will be and all the mates will be you sons of unrighteousness of perdition! going to be a year getting that hogshead ashore? during our trip to new orleans and back we had many with river men and of the river commission with conflicting and confusing to wit: . some in the scheme to arbitrarily and permanently confine and thus deepen the channel preserve threatened . some that the money ought to be spent only on building and the great system of . some that the higher you build your levee the higher the bottom will rise; and that consequently the levee system is a mistake. . some in the scheme to relieve the river in floodtime by turning its surplus waters off into lake . some in the scheme of northern to replenish the mississippi in wherever you find a man down there who in one of these you may turn to the next man and frame your talk upon the hypothesis that he does not believe in that theory; and after you have had experience you do not take this course doubtfully or hesitatingly but with the confidence of a dying murderer converted one i mean. for you will have come to know with a deep and restful certainty that you are not going to meet two people sick of the same theory one right after the other. no there will always be one or two with the other along between. and as you proceed you will find out one or two other things. you will find out that there is no distemper of the lot but is contagious; and you cannot go where it is without catching it. you may vaccinate yourself with deterrent as much as you please it will do no good; it will seem to take but it doesnt; the moment you rub against any one of those make up your mind that it is time to hang out your yellow flag. yes you are his sure victim: yet his work is not all to your hurt only part of it; for he is like your family physician who comes and the mumps and leaves the behind. if your man is a theorist for instance he will exhale a cloud of deadly and statistics which will lay you out with that disease sure; but at the same time he will cure you of any other of the five that may have previously got into your system. i have had all the five; and had them bad; but ask me not in mournful numbers which one me or which one the biggest sick list for i do not know. in truth no one can answer the latter question. mississippi improvement is a mighty topic down yonder. every man on the river banks south of cairo talks about it every day during such as he is able to spare from talking about the war; and each of the several chief its host of zealous but as i have said it is not possible to determine which cause numbers the most all were agreed upon one point however: if congress would make a sufficient appropriation a colossal benefit would result. very well; since then the appropriation been made possibly a sufficient one certainly not too large a one. let us hope that the prophecy will be amply fulfilled. one thing will be easily granted by the reader; that an opinion from mr. edward upon any vast national commercial matter comes as near ranking as authority as can the opinion of any individual in the union. what he to say about mississippi river improvement will be found in the see appendix b. sometimes half a dozen will reveal as with a the importance of a subject which ten thousand labored words with the same purpose in view had left at last but dim and uncertain. here is a case of the sort paragraph from the cincinnati commercial the towboat jos. b. williams is on her way to new orleans with a tow of six hundred thousand to the bushel of coal exclusive of her own fuel being the tow ever taken to new orleans or anywhere else in the world. her freight bill at a bushel to . it would take eighteen hundred of three hundred and to the car to transport this amount of coal. at per ton or per car which would be a fair price for the distance by rail the freight bill would amount to or more by rail than by river. the tow will be taken from to new orleans in fourteen or fifteen days. it would take one hundred of eighteen to the train to transport this one tow of six hundred thousand of coal and even if it made the usual speed of fast freight it would take one whole summer to put it through by rail. when a river in good condition can enable one to save and a whole time on a single cargo the wisdom of taking to keep the river in good condition is made plain to even the uncommercial mind. we through the plum point region turned point and unchallenged by what was once the formidable fort pillow memorable because of the massacre there during the war. are sprinkled with some frequency through the of several christian but this is almost the only one that can be found in american history; perhaps it is the only one which to a size correspondent to that huge and somber title. we have the boston massacre where two or three people were but we must bunch history together to find the fellow to the fort pillow tragedy; and doubtless even then we must travel back to the days and the of de lion that fine hero before we accomplish it. more of the in times past the channel used to strike above island by brandywine bar and down towards island . afterward changed its course and went from brandywine down through chute in the elbow to island part of this course reversing the old order; the river running up four or five miles instead of down and cutting off throughout some fifteen miles of distance. this in . all that region is now centennial island. there is a tradition that island was one of the principal abiding of the once celebrated gang. this was a colossal combination of and engaged in business along the river some fifty or sixty years ago. while our journey across the country towards st. louis was in progress we had had no end of jesse james and his stirring history; for he had just been assassinated by an agent of the governor of missouri and was in consequence a good deal of space in the cheap of him were for sale by train according to these he was the most marvelous creature of his kind that had ever it was a mistake. was his equal in boldness; in pluck; in rapacity; in cruelty brutality heartlessness treachery and in general and comprehensive vileness and shamelessness; and very much his superior in some larger james was a retail rascal; wholesale. modest genius dreamed of no flight than the planning of upon and country banks; projected negro and the capture of new orleans; and furthermore on occasion this could go into a pulpit and edify the congregation. what are james and his vulgar with this stately criminal with his his and and his majestic following of ten hundred men sworn to do his evil will! here is a paragraph or two concerning this big operator from a now forgotten book which was published half a century ago he to have been a most dexterous as well as consummate villain. when he traveled his usual disguise was that of an itinerant preacher; and it is said that his were very interesting the so much that they forgot to look after their which were carried away by his while he was preaching. but the stealing of in one state and selling them in another was but a small portion of their business; the most lucrative was the enticing to run away from their masters that they might sell them in another quarter. this was arranged as they would tell a negro that if he would run away from his master and allow them to sell him he should receive a portion of the money paid for him and that upon his return to them a second time they would send him to a free state where he would be safe. the poor with this request to obtain money and freedom; they would be sold to another master and run away again to their sometimes they would be sold in this manner three or four times until they had realized three or four thousand by them; but as after this there was fear of detection the usual custom was to get rid of the only witness that could be produced against them which was the negro himself by murdering him and throwing his body into the mississippi. even if it was established that they had stolen a negro before he was murdered they were always prepared to evade punishment; for they concealed the negro who had run away until he was advertised and a reward to any man who would catch him. an advertisement of this kind the person to take the property if found. and then the negro becomes a property in trust when therefore they sold the negro it only a breach of trust not stealing; and for a breach of trust the owner of the property can only have redress by a civil action which was useless as the damages were never paid. it may be how it was that escaped lynch law under such circumstances this will be easily understood when it is stated that he had more than a thousand sworn all ready at a notice to support any of the gang who might be in trouble. the names of all the principal of were from himself in a manner which i shall presently explain. the gang was composed of two classes: the or council as they were who planned and concerted but seldom they to about four hundred. the other class were the active and were and to about six hundred and fifty. these were the in the hands of the they ran all the risk and received but a small portion of the money; they were in the power of the leaders of the gang who would sacrifice them at any time by them over to justice or sinking their in the mississippi. the general rendezvous of this gang of was on the arkansas side of the river where they concealed their in the and the of this extensive combination were severely felt; but so well were their arranged that although who was always active was everywhere suspected there was no proof to be it so however that a young man of the name of stewart who was looking after two which had away fell in with him and his confidence took the oath and was admitted into the gang as one of the general council. by this means all was discovered; for stewart turned traitor although he had taken the oath and every information exposed the whole concern the names of all the and finally in bringing home sufficient evidence against to procure his conviction and sentence to the penitentiary was to fourteen years imprisonment; so many people who were supposed to be honest and bore a respectable name in the different were found to be among the list of the grand council as published by stewart that every attempt was made to throw discredit upon his his character was and more than one attempt was made to assassinate him. he was obliged to quit the southern in consequence. it is however now well ascertained to have been all true; and although some blame mr. stewart for violated his oath they no longer attempt to deny that his were correct. i will quote one or two of to mr. stewart made to him when they were journeying together. i ought to have observed that the ultimate of and his were by his own account on a very extended scale; no less an object in view than raising the against the whites taking possession of and plundering new orleans and making themselves of the territory. the following are a few i collected all my about new orleans at one of our in that place and we sat in council three days before we got all our to our notion; we then determined to undertake the rebellion at every hazard and make as many as we could for that purpose. every mans business being assigned him i to natchez on foot sold my horse in new orleans with the intention of stealing another after i i four days and no opportunity for me to get a horse. the fifth day about twelve i had become tired and stopped at a creek to get some water and rest a little. while i was sitting on a log looking down the road the way that i had come a man came in sight riding on a horse. the very moment i saw him i was determined to have his horse if he was in the garb of a traveler. he rode up and i saw from his equipage that he was a traveler. i arose and drew an elegant rifle pistol on him and ordered him to dismount. he did so and i took his horse by the bridle and pointed down the creek and ordered him to walk before me. he went a few hundred and stopped. i his horse and then made him undress himself all to his shirt and drawers and ordered him to turn his back to me. he said if you are determined to kill me let me have time to pray before i die i told him i had no time to hear him pray. he turned around and on his and i shot him through the back of the head. i open his belly and took out his entrails and sunk him in the creek. i then his and found four hundred and and a number of papers that i did not take time to examine. i sunk the pocketbook and papers and his hat in the creek. his boots were and fitted me genteelly; and i put them on and sunk my old shoes in the creek to atone for them. i rolled up his clothes and put them into his portmanteau as they were cloth of the best quality. i mounted as fine a horse as ever i and directed my course for natchez in much better style than i had been for the last five days. myself and a fellow by the name of gathered four good and for georgia. we got in company with a young south carolinian just before we got to cumberland mountain and soon knew all about his business. he had been to tennessee to buy a drove of but when he got there pork was than he calculated and he declined purchasing. we concluded he was a prize. at me; i understood his idea. had traveled the road before but i never had; we had traveled several miles on the mountain when he near a great precipice; just before we it me for my whip which had a pound of lead in the butt; i handed it to him and he rode up by the side of the south carolinian and gave him a blow on the side of the head and tumbled him from his horse; we lit from our and fingered his we got twelve hundred and said he knew a place to hide him and he gathered him under his arms and i by his and him to a deep crevice in the brow of the precipice and tumbled him into it and he went out of sight; we then tumbled in his saddle and took his horse with us which was worth two hundred we were a few days and during that time our friend went to a little village in the neighborhood and saw the negro advertised a negro in our possession and a description of the two men of whom he had been and giving his of the men. it was rather squally times but any port in a storm: we took the negro that night on the bank of a creek which by the farm of our friend and shot him through the head. we took out his entrails and sunk him in the creek. he had sold the other negro the third time on river for upwards of five hundred and then stole him and him into the hand of his friend who him to a swamp and veiled the tragic scene and got the last and sacred pledge of secrecy; as a game of that kind will not do unless it in a mystery to all but the fraternity. he sold the negro first and last for nearly two thousand and then put him for ever out of the reach of all and they can never graze him unless they can find the negro; and that they cannot do for his carcass fed many a tortoise and catfish before this time and the have sung this many a long day to the silent repose of his skeleton. we were approaching memphis in front of which city and by its people was fought the most famous of the river of the civil war. two men whom i had under in my river days took part in that fight: mr. head pilot of the union fleet and montgomery commodore of the confederate fleet. both saw a great deal of active service during the war and high for pluck and capacity. as we memphis we to cast about for an excuse to stay with the gold dust to the end of her course vicksburg. we were so pleasantly situated that we did not wish to make a change. i had an errand of considerable importance to do at napoleon arkansas but perhaps i could manage it without the gold dust. i said as much; so we decided to stick to present quarters. the boat was to tarry at memphis till ten the next morning. it is a beautiful city nobly situated on a commanding bluff overlooking the river. the streets are straight and spacious though not paved in a way to incite distempered admiration. no the admiration must be reserved for the sewerage system which is perfect; a recent reform however for it was just the other way up to a few years ago a reform resulting from the lesson taught by a desolating visitation of the in those awful days the people were swept off by by and so great was the reduction by flight and by death together that the population was diminished and so for a time. business stood nearly still and the streets bore an empty sunday aspect. here is a picture of memphis at that disastrous time drawn by a german tourist who to have been an eyewitness of the which he it is from vii of his book just published in leipzig ernst in august the had its height. daily fell a sacrifice to the terrible epidemic. the city was become a mighty graveyard of the population had deserted the place and only the poor the aged and the sick behind a sure prey for the insidious enemy. the were closed: little burned in front of many a sign that here death had often several lay dead in a single house; from the windows hung black crape. the were shut up for their were gone away or dead. fearful evil! in the space it struck down and swept away even the most vigorous victim. a slight indisposition then an hour of fever then the hideous delirium then the yellow death! on the street and in the lay sick men suddenly by the disease; and even distorted and rigid. food meat spoiled in a few hours in the fetid and pestiferous air and turned black. fearful issue from many then after a season they cease and all is still: noble men come with the coffin nail it up and carry it away to the graveyard. in the night stillness only the and the hurry through the streets; and out of the distance at comes the muffled thunder of the railway train which with the speed of the wind and as if hunted by furies flies by the city without halting. but there is life enough there now. the population forty thousand and is and trade is in a flourishing condition. we drove about the city; the park and the sociable horde of there; saw the fine and in other ways enticing to the eye; and got a good breakfast at the hotel. a thriving place is the good samaritan city of the mississippi: a great wholesale jobbing trade; machine and of and cottonseed oil; and is shortly to have cotton mills and her cotton receipts five hundred thousand last year an increase of sixty thousand over the year before. out from her healthy commercial heart issue five trunk of railway; and a sixth is being added. this is a very different memphis from the one which the vanished and unremembered procession of foreign used to put into their long time ago. in the days of the now forgotten but once renowned and vigorously hated mrs. trollope memphis to have mainly of one long street of with some outlying sprinkled around rearward toward the woods; and now and then a pig and no end of mud. that was years ago. she stopped at the hotel. plainly it was not the one which gave us our breakfast. she the table was laid for fifty and was nearly full. they ate in perfect silence and with such astonishing rapidity that their dinner was over literally before ours was begun; the only heard were those produced by the and with the unceasing chorus of coughing coughing the for an unpleasant word there a word which she does not always charitably cover up but sometimes you will find it in the following description of a steamboat dinner which she ate in company with a lot of aristocratic wealthy wellborn ignorant they were with the usual harmless military and judicial of that old day of cheap and windy pretense the total want of all the usual of the table; the voracious rapidity with which the viands were and the strange uncouth and pronunciation; the loathsome spitting from the contamination of which it was absolutely impossible to protect our the frightful manner of feeding with their till the whole blade to enter into the mouth; and the still more frightful manner of cleaning the teeth afterward with a pocket knife soon forced us to feel that we were not surrounded by the and majors of the old world; and that the dinner hour was to be anything rather than an hour of enjoyment. it was a big river below memphis; banks brimming full everywhere and very frequently more than full the waters pouring out over the land flooding the woods and fields for miles into the interior; and in to a depth of fifteen all about of hard work gone to ruin and all to be done over again with means and a weakened courage. a melancholy picture and a continuous one; of miles of it. sometimes the beacon stood in water three deep in the edge of dense which extended for miles without farm woodyard clearing or break of any kind; which meant that the keeper of the light must come in a skiff a great distance to discharge his trust and often in desperate weather. yet i was told that the work is faithfully in all and not always by men sometimes by if the man is sick or absent. the government oil and ten or fifteen a month for the lighting and tending. a government boat oil and wages once a month. the ship island region was as woodsy and tenantless as ever. the island to be an island; joined itself compactly to the main shore and travel now where the used to navigate. no left of the wreck of the pennsylvania. some farmer will turn up her bones with his plow one day no doubt and be surprised. we were getting down now into the negro region. these poor people could never travel when they were so they make up for the privation now. they stay on a plantation till the desire to travel them; then they pack up hail a steamboat and clear out. not for any particular place; no nearly any place will answer; they only want to be moving. the amount of money on hand will answer the rest of the conundrum for them. if it will take them fifty miles very well; let it be fifty. if not a shorter flight will do. during a couple of days we frequently these sometimes there was a group of populous with colored folk and no whites visible; with grassless of dry ground here and there; a few with skeleton cattle and eating the leaves and gnawing the bark no other food for them in the land. sometimes there was a single lonely near it the colored family that had us; little and big old and young on the scant pile of household goods; these of a rusty gun some tinware a crippled a venerable armchair and six or eight baseborn and spiritless yellow attached to the family by strings. they must have their dogs; cant go without their dogs. yet the dogs are never willing; they always object; so one after another in ridiculous procession they are dragged aboard; all four braced and sliding along the stage head likely to be off; but the tugger marching determinedly forward bending to his work with the rope over his shoulder for better purchase. sometimes a child is forgotten and left on the bank; but never a dog. the usual going on in the pilothouse. island no. an island with a lovely chute or passage behind it in the former times. they said jesse in the skylark had a visiting pilot with him one trip a poor old superannuated fellow left him at the wheel at the foot of to run off the watch. the ancient mariner went up through the chute and down the river outside; and up the chute and down the river again; and yet again and again; and handed the boat over to the relieving pilot at the end of three hours of honest endeavor at the same old foot of the island where he had originally taken the wheel! a darkey on shore who had observed the boat go by about thirteen times said to gracious i wouldnt be if a whole line o anecdote illustrative of influence of reputation in the changing of opinion. the eclipse was renowned for her swiftness. one day she along; an old darkey on shore absorbed in his own did not notice what steamer it was. presently someone no! is dat so? well i bet it was cause she went by here piece of history illustrative of the violent style of some of the people down along here during the early of high water as fence rails washed down on bs ground and bs rails washed up in the eddy and landed on as ground. a said let the thing remain so; i will use your rails and you use mine. but b wouldnt have it so. one day a came down on bs ground to get his rails. b said ill kill you! and for him with his revolver. a said not armed. so b who wished to do only what was right threw down his revolver; then a knife and cut as throat all around but gave his principal attention to the front and so to sever the jugular. struggling around a to get his hands on the discarded revolver and shot b dead with it and recovered from his own further gossip; after which everybody went below to get afternoon coffee and left me at the wheel alone something presently me of our last hour in st. louis part of which i spent on this hurricane deck aft. i was joined there by a stranger who into conversation with me a brisk young fellow who said he was born in a town in the interior of wisconsin and had never seen a steamboat until a week before. also said that on the way down from la crosse he had and his boat so diligently and with such passionate interest that he had mastered the whole thing from stem to me where i was from. i new england. oh a yank! said he; and went chatting straight along without waiting for assent or denial. he immediately to take me all over the boat and tell me the names of her different parts and teach me their before i could enter protest or excuse he was already rattling glibly away at his benevolent work; and when i perceived that he was the things and inhospitably amusing himself at the expense of an innocent stranger from a far country i held my peace and let him have his way. he gave me a world of misinformation; and the further he went the his imagination expanded and the more he his cruel work of deceit. sometimes after off a particularly fantastic and outrageous lie upon me he was so full of laugh that he had to step aside for a minute upon one pretext or another to keep me from i staid faithfully by him until his comedy was finished. then he that he had to learn me all about a steamboat and had done it; but that if he had overlooked anything just ask him and he would supply the lack. anything about this boat that you dont know the name of or the purpose of you come to me and ill tell you. i said i would and took my departure; and him from another quarter whence he could not see me. there he sat all alone doubling himself up and writhing this way and that in the throes of unappeasable laughter. he must have made himself sick; for he was not publicly visible afterward for several days. meantime the episode out of my mind. the thing that me of it now when i was alone at the wheel was the spectacle of this young fellow standing in the pilothouse door with the knob in his hand silently and severely me. i dont know when i have seen anybody look so injured as he did. he did not say anything simply stood there and reproachfully and finally he shut the door and away; on the texas a minute; came slowly back and stood in the door again with that grieved look in his face; upon me awhile in meek rebuke then said language pause impotent struggle for further words then he gave it up choked out a deep strong oath and departed for good. afterward i saw him several times below during the trip; but he was cold would not look at me. idiot if he had not been in such a sweat to play his witless practical joke upon me in the beginning i would have persuaded his into some other direction and saved him from that wanton and silly impoliteness. i had myself with the four oclock watch mornings for one cannot see too many summer on the mississippi. they are enchanting. first there is the eloquence of silence; for a deep hush everywhere. next there is the haunting sense of loneliness isolation remoteness from the worry and bustle of the world. the dawn creeps in stealthily; the solid of black forest soften to gray and vast of the river open up and reveal themselves; the water is off spectral little of white mist there is not the breath of wind nor stir of leaf; the tranquillity is profound and infinitely satisfying. then a bird up another and soon the develop into a jubilant riot of music. you see none of the you simply move through an atmosphere of song which to sing itself. when the light become a little you have one of the and imaginable. you have the intense green of the and crowded foliage near by; you see it paling shade by shade in front of you; upon the next projecting cape a mile off or more the tint to the tender young green of spring; the cape beyond that one almost lost color and the furthest one miles away under the horizon upon the water a mere dim vapor and hardly separable from the sky above it and about it. and all this stretch of river is a mirror and you have the shadowy of the leafage and the curving and the receding capes pictured in it. well that is all beautiful; soft and rich and beautiful; and when the sun well up and a pink flush here and a powder of gold yonder and a purple haze where it will yield the best effect you grant that you have seen something that is worth remembering. we had the kentucky bend country in the early morning scene of a strange and tragic accident in the old times captain poe had a small boat for years the home of himself and his wife. one night the boat struck a snag in the head of kentucky bend and sank with astonishing suddenness; water already well above the cabin floor when the captain got aft. so he cut into his stateroom from above with an ax; she was asleep in the upper berth the roof a one than was supposed; the first blow down through the rotten boards and clove her skull. this bend is all filled up now result of a cutoff; and the same agent taken the great and once walnut bend and set it away back in a solitude far from the accustomed track of passing helena we and also a town i had not heard of before it being of recent birth arkansas city. it was born of a railway; the little rock mississippi river and texas railroad the river there. we a passenger who there what sort of a place it was. well said he after considering and with the air of one who to take time and be accurate its a hell of a place. a description which was photographic for exactness. there were several and of shabby and a supply of mud sufficient to insure the town against a famine in that article for a hundred years; for the overflow had but lately there were stagnant in the streets here and there and a dozen rude were scattered about lying aground wherever they to have been when the waters drained off and people could do their visiting and shopping on foot once more. still it is a thriving place with a rich country behind it an elevator in front of it and also a fine big mill for the manufacture of cottonseed oil. i had never seen this kind of a mill before. cottonseed was comparatively valueless in my time; but it is worth or a ton now and none of it is thrown away. the oil made from it is colorless tasteless and almost if not entirely odorless. it is that it can by proper manipulation be made to resemble and perform the office of any and all and be produced at a rate than the of the sagacious people shipped it to italy it labeled it and brought it back as olive oil. this trade grew to be so formidable that italy was obliged to put a prohibitory impost upon it to keep it from working serious injury to her oil industry. helena one of the on the mississippi. her perch is the last the southernmost group of which one on that side of the river. in its normal condition it is a pretty town; but the flood or possibly the seepage had lately been ravaging it; whole streets of had been by the muddy water and the of the were still belted with a broad stain extending upwards from the stranded and discarded lay all about; plank on four high were still standing; the board on the ground level were loose and ruinous a couple of men along them could make a blind man think a cavalry charge was coming; everywhere the mud was black and deep and in many malarious of stagnant water were standing. a mississippi inundation is the next most wasting and desolating infliction to a fire. we had an enjoyable time here on this sunny sunday: two full hours liberty ashore while the boat discharged freight. in the back streets but few white people were visible but there were plenty of colored folk mainly and and almost without exception upholstered in bright new clothes of swell and elaborate style and cut a glaring and hilarious contrast to the mournful mud and the pensive helena is the second town in arkansas in point of population which is placed at five thousand. the country about it is exceptionally productive. helena a good cotton trade; from forty to sixty thousand annually; she a large lumber and grain commerce; a foundry oil mills machine and wagon in brief in manufacturing she two and is the commercial center of a broad and prosperous region. her gross receipts of money annually from all are placed by the new orleans at . we were approaching napoleon arkansas. so i to think about my errand there. time noonday; and bright and sunny. this was bad not best anyway; for mine was not preferably a noonday kind of errand. the more i thought the more that fact itself upon me now in one form now in another. finally it took the form of a distinct question: is it good common sense to do the errand in daytime when by a little sacrifice of comfort and inclination you can have night for it and no inquisitive eyes around. this settled it. plain question and plain answer make the road out of most i got my into my stateroom and said i was sorry to create annoyance and disappointment but that upon reflection it really best that we put our luggage ashore and stop over at napoleon. their disapproval was prompt and loud; their language mutinous. their main argument was one which always been the first to come to the surface in such since the beginning of time: but you decided and agreed to stick to this boat as if determined to do an unwise thing one is thereby bound to go ahead and make two unwise things of it by carrying out that determination. i tried various mollifying tactics upon them with reasonably good success: under which encouragement i increased my and to show them that i had not this annoying errand and was in no way to blame for it i presently into its history substantially as toward the end of last year i spent a few in munich bavaria. in november i was living in fraulein pension a but my working quarters were a mile from there in the house of a widow who supported herself by taking she and her two young used to drop in every morning and talk german to me by request. one day during a ramble about the city i one of the two where the government and until the decide that they are permanently dead and not in a trance state. it was a grisly place that spacious room. there were of in sight stretched on their on slightly slanted boards in three long all of them with rigid and all of them wrapped in white along the sides of the room were deep like bay windows; and in each of these lay several utterly hidden and buried under banks of fresh all but their and crossed hands. around a finger of each of these fifty still both great and small was a ring; and from the ring a wire led to the ceiling and thence to a bell in a yonder where day and night a watchman always alert and ready to spring to the aid of any of that pallid company who waking out of death shall make a movement for any even the movement will twitch the wire and ring that fearful bell. i myself a drowsing there alone far in the dragging of some wailing gusty night and in a twinkling all my body stricken to quivering jelly by the sudden clamor of that awful summons! so i about this thing; what usually? if the watchman and the corpse came and did what it could to make his last easy. but i was for trying to feed an idle and frivolous curiosity in so solemn and so mournful a place; and went my way with a humbled crest. come with me! i have a lodger who shall tell you all you want to know. he been a there. he was a living man but he did not look it. he was abed and had his head high on his face was wasted and colorless his eyes were shut; his hand lying on his breast was it was so bony and the widow her introduction of me. the mans eyes opened slowly and wickedly out from the twilight of their he a black frown; he lifted his lean hand and waved us peremptorily away. but the widow kept straight on till she had got out the fact that i was a stranger and an american. the mans face changed at once; even eager and the next moment he and i were alone together. i opened up in german; he in quite flexible english; thereafter we gave the german language a permanent rest. this consumptive and i good i him every day and we about everything. at least about everything but and let wife or child be and three things always the most gracious and loving and tender light in the mans eyes for a moment; faded out the next and in its place came that deadly look which had flamed there the first time i ever saw his unclose; thirdly he from speech there and then for that day; lay silent abstracted and absorbed; apparently heard nothing that i said; took no notice of my and plainly did not know by either sight or hearing when i left the room. when i had been this karl daily and sole intimate during two he one day said abruptly i have never given up until now. but now i have given up. i am going to die. i made up my mind last night that it must be and very soon too. you say you are going to revisit your river when you find opportunity. very well; that together with a certain strange experience which fell to my lot last night me to tell you my history for you will see napoleon arkansas; and for my sake you will stop there and do a certain thing for me a thing which you will willingly undertake after you shall have heard my narrative. let us shorten the story wherever we can for it will need it being long. you already know how i came to go to america and how i came to settle in that lonely region in the south. but you do not know that i had a wife. my wife was young beautiful loving and oh so divinely good and blameless and gentle! and our little girl was her mother in miniature. it was the happiest of happy one night it was toward the close of the war i woke up out of a sodden lethargy and found myself bound and and the air tainted with chloroform! i saw two men in the room and one was saying to the other in a hoarse whisper i told her i would if she made a noise and as for the child you said wed only gag them and rob them not hurt them; or i wouldnt have come. shut up your had to change the plan when they up; you done all you could to protect them now let that satisfy you; come help rummage. both men were masked and wore coarse ragged  clothes; they had a lantern and by its light i noticed that the robber had no thumb on his right hand. they around my poor cabin for a moment; the head bandit then said in his stage whisper its a waste of time he shall tell where its undo his gag and revive him up. they me; just then there was a sound outside; a sound of and trampling hoofs; the held their breath and the came slowly nearer and nearer; then came a shout the voice by g ! said the ruffian and both fled by the way of the back door shutting off their as they ran. the shouted several times more then rode by there to be a dozen of the and i heard nothing more. i but could not free myself from my i tried to speak but the gag was effective; i could not make a sound. i for my voice and my long and intently but no sound came from the other end of the room where their bed was. this silence more and more awful more and more ominous every moment. could you have an hour of it do you think? pity me then who had to endure three. three hours ? it was three whenever the clock struck it as if years had gone by since i had heard it last. all this time i was struggling in my and at last about dawn i got myself free and rose up and stretched my stiff i was able to distinguish details pretty well. the floor was littered with things thrown there by the during their search for my savings. the first object that caught my particular attention was a document of mine which i had seen the rougher of the two glance at and then cast away. it had blood on it! i to the other end of the room. oh poor unoffending helpless there they lay their ended mine begun! did i appeal to the law i? does it quench the thirst if the king drink for him? oh no no no i wanted no impertinent interference of the law. laws and the gallows could not pay the debt that was owing to me! let the laws leave the matter in my hands and have no i would find the debtor and collect the debt. how accomplish this do you say? how accomplish it and feel so sure about it when i had neither seen the nor heard their natural nor had any idea who they might be? nevertheless i was sure quite sure quite confident. i had a clue a clue which you would not have valued a clue which would not have greatly even a detective since he would lack the secret of how to apply it. i shall come to that presently you shall see. let us go on now taking things in their due order. there was one circumstance which gave me a slant in a definite direction to begin with: those two were manifestly in tramp disguise; and not new to military service but old in it perhaps; they did not acquire their soldierly attitude carriage in a day nor a month nor yet in a year. so i thought but said nothing. and one of them had said the voice by g ! the one whose life i would have. two miles away several were in camp and two of u.s. cavalry. when i learned that captain of company c had our way that night with an escort i said nothing but in that company i resolved to seek my man. in conversation i studiously and persistently described the as camp followers; and among this class the people made useless search none the but me. working patiently by night in my home i made a disguise for myself out of various odds and of clothing; in the nearest village i bought a pair of blue goggles. when the military camp broke up and company c was ordered a hundred miles north to napoleon i my small hoard of money in my belt and took my departure in the night. when company c in napoleon i was already there. yes i was there with a new trade fortuneteller. not to seem partial i made and told among all the there; but i gave company c the great bulk of my i made myself limitlessly obliging to these particular men; they could ask me no favor put upon me no risk which i would decline. i the willing butt of their this perfected my popularity; i a favorite. i early found a private who a thumb what joy it was to me! and when i found that he alone of all the company had lost a thumb my last misgiving vanished; i was sure i was on the right track. this mans name was kruger a german. there were nine in the company. i watched to see who might be his but he to have no especial but i was his intimate; and i took care to make the intimacy grow. sometimes i so for my revenge that i could hardly restrain myself from going on my and begging him to point out the man who had murdered my wife and child; but i to bridle my tongue. i my time and went on telling as opportunity my apparatus was simple: a little red paint and a bit of white paper. i painted the ball of the thumb took a print of it on the paper studied it that night and revealed his fortune to him next day. what was my idea in this nonsense? it was this: when i was a youth i knew an old frenchman who had been a for thirty years and he told me that there was one thing about a person which never changed from the cradle to the grave the in the ball of the thumb; and he said that these were never exactly alike in the of any two human in these days we photograph the new criminal and hang his picture in the gallery for future reference; but that frenchman in his day used to take a print of the ball of a new thumb and put that away for future reference. he always said that were no good future could make them useless; the the only sure thing said he; you cant disguise that. and he used to prove his theory too on my and it always i went on telling every night i shut myself in all alone and studied the days with a imagine the devouring eagerness with which i pored over those mazy red with that document by my side which bore the of that unknown murderer printed with the dearest blood to me that was ever shed on this earth! and many and many a time i had to repeat the same old disappointed remark will they never correspond! but my reward came at last. it was the print of the thumb of the man of company c whom i had experimented on private an hour before i did not know the name or voice or figure or face or nationality; but now i knew all these things! i i might feel sure; the repeated being so good a warranty. still there was a way to make sure. i had an impression of left thumb. in the morning i took him aside when he was off duty; and when we were out of sight and hearing of i said impressively a part of your fortune is so grave that i thought it would be better for you if i did not tell it in public. you and another man whose fortune i was studying last night private have been murdering a woman and a child! you are being dogged: within five days both of you will be assassinated. he on his frightened out of his wits; and for five minutes he kept pouring out the same set of words like a demented person and in the same way which was one of my of that murderous night in my cabin i didnt do it; upon my soul i didnt do it; and i tried to keep him from doing it; i did as god is my witness. he did it alone. this was all i wanted. and i tried to get rid of the fool; but no he clung to me imploring me to save him from the assassin. he said i have money ten thousand away the fruit of loot and thievery; save me tell me what to do and you shall have it every penny. of it is my cousin but you can take it all. we it when we first came here. but i it in a new place yesterday and have not told him shall not tell him. i was going to desert and get away with it all. it is gold and too heavy to carry when one is running and dodging; but a woman who been gone over the river two days to prepare my way for me is going to follow me with it; and if i got no chance to describe the to her i was going to slip my silver watch into her hand or send it to her and she would understand. theres a piece of paper in the back of the case which it all. here take the watch tell me what to do! he was trying to press his watch upon me and was the paper and explaining it to me when on the scene about a dozen away. i said to poor kruger put up your watch i dont want it. you shant come to any harm. go now; i must tell his fortune. presently i will tell you how to escape the assassin; meantime i shall have to examine your thumbmark again. say nothing to about this thing say nothing to anybody. he went away filled with fright and gratitude poor devil. i told a long fortune purposely so long that i could not finish it; to come to him on guard that night and tell him the really important part of it the tragical part of it i said so must be out of reach of they always kept a outside the town mere discipline and ceremony no occasion for it no enemy around. toward midnight i set out equipped with the countersign and picked my way toward the lonely region where was to keep his watch. it was so dark that i right on a dim figure almost before i could get out a protecting word. the sentinel and i both at the same moment. i added its only me the fortuneteller. then i slipped to the poor side and without a word i drove my dirk into his heart! ya i it was the tragedy part of his fortune indeed! as he fell from his horse he at me and my blue goggles in his hand; and away the beast dragging him with his foot in the stirrup. i fled through the woods and made good my escape leaving the accusing goggles behind me in that dead mans hand. this was fifteen or sixteen years ago. since then i have aimlessly about the earth sometimes at work sometimes idle; sometimes with money sometimes with none; but always tired of life and wishing it was done for my mission here was finished with the act of that night; and the only pleasure solace satisfaction i had in all those tedious years was in the daily reflection i have him! four years ago my health to fail. i had into munich in my purposeless way. being out of money i sought work and got it; did my duty faithfully about a year and was then given the berth of night watchman yonder in that deadhouse which you lately. the place suited my mood. i liked it. i liked being with the dead liked being alone with them. i used to wander among those rigid and peer into their austere by the hour. the later the time the more impressive it was; i preferred the late time. sometimes i turned the low: this gave perspective you see; and the imagination could play; always the dim receding of the dead inspired one with weird and fascinating two years ago i had been there a year then i was sitting all alone in the one gusty night chilled numb comfortless; drowsing gradually into unconsciousness; the sobbing of the wind and the of distant falling fainter and fainter upon my ear each moment when sharp and suddenly that rang out a bloodcurdling alarum over my head! the shock of it nearly paralyzed me; for it was the first time i had ever heard it. i gathered myself together and flew to the about midway down the outside rank a shrouded figure was sitting upright its head slowly from one side to the other a grisly spectacle! its side was toward me. i hurried to it and into its face. heavens it was can you divine what my first thought was? put into words it was this: it then you escaped me once: there will be a different result this time! evidently this creature was suffering unimaginable think what it must have been to wake up in the midst of that voiceless hush and look out over that grim congregation of the dead! what gratitude shone in his skinny white face when he saw a living form before him! and how the fervency of this mute gratitude was augmented when his eyes fell upon the which i carried in my hands! then imagine the horror which came into this pinched face when i put the behind me and said mockingly speak up call upon these dead. doubtless they will listen and have pity; but here there is none else that will. he tried to speak but that part of the shroud which bound his held firm and would not let him. he tried to lift imploring hands but they were crossed upon his breast and tied. i said shout make the in the distant streets hear you and bring help. shout and lose no time for there is little to lose. what you cannot? that is a pity; but it is no matter it does not always bring help. when you and your cousin murdered a helpless woman and child in a cabin in arkansas my wife it was and my child! they shrieked for help you remember; but it did no good; you remember that it did no good is it not so? your teeth chatter then why cannot you shout? loosen the with your hands then you can. ah i see your hands are tied they cannot aid you. how strangely things repeat themselves after long years; for my hands were tied that night you remember? yes tied much as yours are now how odd that is. i could not pull free. it did not occur to you to untie me; it does not occur to me to untie you. sh ! theres a late footstep. it is coming this way. hark how near it is! one can count the one two three. there it is just outside. now is the time! shout man shout! it is the one sole chance between you and eternity! ah you see you have delayed too long it is gone by. there it is dying out. it is gone! think of it reflect upon it you have heard a human footstep for the last time. how curious it must be to listen to so common a sound as that and know that one will never hear the fellow to it again. oh my friend the agony in that shrouded face was ecstasy to see! i thought of a new torture and applied it myself with a trifle of lying invention that poor kruger tried to save my wife and child and i did him a grateful good turn for it when the time came. i persuaded him to rob you; and i and a woman him to desert and got him away in safety. a look as of surprise and triumph shone out dimly through the anguish in my face. i was disturbed disquieted. i said the satisfaction in the shrouded face was still plainer. the man tried to mumble out some words could not succeed; tried to express something with his obstructed hands a moment then feebly tilted his head in a meaning way toward the corpse that lay nearest him. again the man tried to do something with his hands. i watched closely but could not guess the intent. i bent over and watched still more intently. he had twisted a thumb around and was weakly punching at his breast with it. ah do you mean? affirmative nod accompanied by a spectral smile of such peculiar devilishness that it struck an awakening light through my dull brain and i cried did i stab him mistaking him for you? for that stroke was meant for none but you. the affirmative nod of the rascal was as joyous as his failing strength was able to put into its expression. o miserable miserable me to slaughter the pitying soul that stood a friend to my when they were helpless and would have saved them if he could! miserable oh miserable miserable me! i fancied i heard the muffled gurgle of a mocking laugh. i took my face out of my hands and saw my enemy sinking back upon his inclined board. he was a satisfactory long time dying. he had a wonderful vitality an astonishing constitution. yes he was a pleasant long time at it. i got a chair and a newspaper and sat down by him and read. occasionally i took a sip of brandy. this was necessary on account of the cold. but i did it partly because i saw that along at first whenever i for the bottle he thought i was going to give him some. i read aloud: mainly imaginary of people snatched from the graves threshold and to life and vigor by a few of liquor and a warm bath. yes he had a long hard death of it three hours and six minutes from the time he rang his bell. it is that in all these eighteen years that have elapsed since the institution of the no shrouded occupant of the bavarian ever rung its bell. well it is a harmless belief. let it stand at that. the chill of that had my bones. it revived and fastened upon me the disease which had been afflicting me but which up to that night had been steadily disappearing. that man murdered my wife and my child; and in three days hence he will have added me to his list. no matter god! how delicious the memory of it! i caught him from his grave and thrust him back into it. after that night i was confined to my bed for a week; but as soon as i could get about i went to the deadhouse and got the number of the house which had in. a wretched lodginghouse it was. it was my idea that he would naturally have gotten hold of effects being his cousin; and i wanted to get watch if i could. but while i was sick things had been sold and scattered all except a few old letters and some odds and of no value. however through those letters i out a son of the only relative left. he is a man of thirty now a shoemaker by trade and living at no. mannheim widower with several small without explaining to him why i have furnished of his support ever since. now as to that watch see how strangely things happen! i it around and about germany for more than a year at considerable cost in money and vexation; and at last i got it. got it and was unspeakably glad; opened it and found nothing in it! why i might have known that that bit of paper was not going to stay there all this time. of course i gave up that ten thousand then; gave it up and it out of my mind: and most sorrowfully for i had wanted it for son. last night when i at last that i must die i to make ready. i to burn all useless papers; and sure enough from a batch of not previously with thoroughness out that scrap! i recognized it in a moment. here it is i will translate it: brick livery stable stone foundation middle of town corner of orleans and market. corner toward courthouse. third stone fourth row. stick notice there saying how many are to come. there take it and preserve it. kruger that that stone was removable; and that it was in the north wall of the foundation fourth row from the top and third stone from the west. the money is behind it. he said the closing sentence was a blind to mislead in case the paper should fall into wrong hands. it probably that office for now i want to beg that when you make your intended journey down the river you will hunt out that hidden money and send it to adam kruger care of the mannheim address which i have it will make a rich man of him and i shall sleep the sounder in my grave for knowing that i have done what i could for the son of the man who tried to save my wife and child albeit my hand ignorantly struck him down whereas the impulse of my heart would have been to shield and serve him. such was narrative said i to my two there was a profound and impressive silence which a considerable time; then both men broke into a fusillade of exciting and admiring over the strange of the tale; and this along with a rattling fire of was kept up until all hands were about out of breath. then my to cool down and draw off under shelter of occasional into silence and abysmal reverie. for ten minutes now there was stillness. then rogers said dreamily i was going to say more but stopped was stopped by a train of thought which up in me. thompson spoke but my mind was absent and i did not catch what he said. but i heard rogers answer yes it so to me. it ought to be quite sufficient; for i dont see that he done anything. when you come to look at it it is more than sufficient. just look at it five thousand why he spend it in a lifetime! and it would injure him too; perhaps ruin him you want to look at that. in a little while he would throw his last away shut up his shop maybe take to drinking maltreat his motherless drift into other evil go steadily from bad to worse yes thats it interrupted rogers fervently seen it a hundred times yes more than a hundred. you put money into the hands of a man like that if you want to destroy him thats all; just put money into his hands its all youve got to do; and if it dont pull him down and take all the usefulness out of him and all the and everything then i dont know human nature aint that so thompson? and even if we were to give him a third of it; why in less than six less than six youd better say! said i warming up and breaking in. unless he had that three thousand in safe hands where he touch it he would no more last you six than of course he wouldnt said thompson; edited for that kind of people; and the moment they get their hands on the royalty maybe its three thousand maybe its two thousand what business that shoemaker with two thousand i should like to know? broke in rogers earnestly. a man perhaps perfectly contented now there in mannheim surrounded by his own class eating his bread with the appetite which laborious industry alone can give enjoying his humble life honest upright pure in heart; and blest! yes i say blest! blest above all the that go in silk attire and walk the empty artificial round of social folly but just you put that temptation before him once! just you lay fifteen hundred before a man like that and say fifteen hundred cried i five hundred would rot his paralyze his industry drag him to the rumshop thence to the gutter thence to the almshouse thence to why put upon ourselves this crime interrupted the poet earnestly and appealingly. he is happy where he is and as he is. every sentiment of honor every sentiment of charity every sentiment of high and sacred benevolence us us us to leave him undisturbed. that is real friendship that is true friendship. we could follow other that would be more showy; but none that would be so truly kind and wise depend upon it. after some further talk it evident that each of us down in his heart felt some over this settlement of the matter. it was manifest that we all felt that we ought to send the poor shoemaker something. there was long and thoughtful discussion of this point; and we finally decided to send him a chromo. well now that everything to be arranged satisfactorily to everybody concerned a new trouble broke out: it that these two men were to share equally in the money with me. that was not my idea. i said that if they got half of it between them they might consider themselves lucky. rogers said who would have had any if it been for me? i flung out the first hint but for that it would all have gone to the shoemaker. thompson said that he was thinking of the thing himself at the very moment that rogers had originally spoken. i retorted that the idea would have to me plenty soon enough and without help. i was slow about thinking maybe but i was sure. this matter warmed up into a quarrel; then into a fight; and each man got pretty badly battered. as soon as i had got myself up after a fashion i to the hurricane deck in a pretty sour humor. i found captain there and said as pleasantly as my humor would permit the captain but seeing that i was not in a jovial mood stopped that and said come what is all this about? cant a man go ashore at napoleon if he to? why hang it dont you know? there any napoleon any more. been for years and years. the arkansas river burst through it tore it all to and it into the mississippi! carried the whole town courthouse theater fire department livery stable everything ? everything. just a job. or such a matter. didnt leave hide nor hair shred nor shingle of it except the of a shanty and one brick chimney. this boat is paddling along right now where the deadcenter of that town used to be; yonder is the brick thats left of napoleon. these dense woods on the right used to be a mile back of the town. take a look behind you upstream now you begin to recognize this country dont you? yes i do recognize it now. it is the most wonderful thing i ever heard of; by a long shot the most wonderful and unexpected. mr. thompson and mr. rogers had meantime with and and had silently to the news. thompson put a in my hand and said softly yes it was an astonishing thing to see the mississippi rolling between unpeopled and straight over the spot where i used to see a good big town twenty years ago. town that was of a great and important county; town with a big united marine hospital; town of innumerable an inquest every day; town where i had used to know the girl and the most accomplished in the whole mississippi valley; town where we were handed the first printed news of the mournful disaster a quarter of a century ago; a town no more up vanished gone to feed the nothing left but a fragment of a shanty and a brick chimney! in regard to island which is situated not far from the former napoleon a freak of the river here sorely perplexed the laws of men and made them a vanity and a jest. when the state of arkansas was chartered she controlled to the center of the river a most unstable line. the state of mississippi to the channel another shifty and unstable line. no. to arkansas. by and by a cutoff threw this big island out of arkansas and yet not within mississippi. middle of the river on one side of it channel on the other. that is as i understand the problem. whether i have got the details right or wrong this fact remains: that here is this big and exceedingly valuable island of four thousand acres thrust out in the cold and belonging to neither the one state nor the other; paying to neither owing allegiance to neither. one man the whole island and of right is the man without a country. island to arkansas. the river moved it over and joined it to mississippi. a chap established a whiskey shop there without a mississippi license and himself upon mississippi custom under arkansas protection where no license was in those days required. we steadily down the river in the usual privacy steamboat or other moving thing seldom seen. scenery as always: stretch upon stretch of almost unbroken forest on both sides of the river; soundless solitude. here and there a cabin or two standing in small on the gray and grassless banks which had formerly stood a quarter or farther to the front and gradually been farther and farther back as the in. as at point for instance where the had been moved back three hundred in three so we were told; but the caving banks had already caught up with them and they were being rearward once more. napoleon had but small opinion of greenville mississippi in the old times; but behold napoleon is gone to the and here is greenville full of life and activity and making a considerable flourish in the valley; three thousand it is said and doing a gross trade of annually. a growing town. there was much talk on the boat about the land company an enterprise which is expected to work wholesome colonel a grandson of the statesman went to boston and formed a syndicate which a large tract of land on the river in chicot county arkansas some ten thousand acres for the purpose is to work on a cash basis: buy at first hands and handle their own product; supply their negro with provisions and at a trifling profit say or per cent.; furnish them comfortable quarters and encourage them to save money and remain on the place. if this a financial success as quite certain they propose to establish a in greenville and lend money at an unburdensome rate of interest per cent. is spoken of. the trouble heretofore been i am of and that the although the land were without cash capital; had to hypothecate both land and crop to carry on the business. consequently the commission dealer who the money some risk and big interest usually per cent. and half per cent. for the loan. the planter also to buy his through the same dealer paying and profits. then when he his crop the dealer his insurance so taking it by and large and first and last the share of that crop is about per but what can the state do where the people are under subjection to rates of interest ranging from to per cent. and are also under the necessity of purchasing their in advance even of planting at these rates for the privilege of purchasing all their at per cent. profit? edward a estimate of the average margin of profit on planting in his section: one man and mule will raise ten acres of cotton giving ten cotton worth say ; cost of say ; net profit or per acre. there is also a profit now from the cottonseed which formerly had little value none where much transportation was necessary. in sixteen hundred crude cotton four hundred are lint worth say ten a pound; and twelve hundred of seed worth or per ton. maybe in future even the will not be thrown away. mr. edward that for each bale of cotton there are fifteen hundred of and that these are very rich in phosphate of lime and potash; that when ground and mixed with ensilage or cottonseed meal which is too rich for use as fodder in large the stem mixture a superior food rich in all the elements needed for the production of milk meat and bone. heretofore the have been considered a nuisance. complaint is made that the planter remains grouty toward the former slave since the war; will have nothing but a chill business relation with him no sentiment permitted to intrude will not keep a store himself and supply the and thus protect the pocket and make him able and willing to stay on the place and an advantage to him to do it but that privilege to some thrifty israelite who the thoughtless negro and wife to buy all of things which they could do without buy on credit at big month after month credit based on the share of the growing crop; and at the end of the season the share to the israelite the negro is in debt besides is discouraged dissatisfied restless and both he and the planter are injured; for he will take steamboat and migrate and the planter must get a stranger in his place who does not know him does not care for him will fatten the israelite a season and follow his predecessor per steamboat. it is hoped that the company will show by its humane and protective treatment of its that its method is the most profitable for both planter and negro; and it is that a general adoption of that method will then follow. and where so many are saying their say shall not the barkeeper testify? he is thoughtful observant never to earn his salary and would earn it if there were custom enough. he the people along here in mississippi and louisiana will send up the river to buy rather than raise them and they will come aboard at the and buy of the barkeeper. they dont know anything but cotton; they dont know how to raise and fruit at least the most of them. a  will go to h for a watermelon h is all i find in the report means halifax probably though that a good way to go for a watermelon. barkeeper for five up the river them down and them for fifty. why does he mix such elaborate and picturesque for the  hands on the boat? because they wont have any other. they want a big drink; dont make any difference what you make it of they want the worth of their money. you give a  a plain gill of brandy for five will he touch it? no. aint size enough to it. but you put up a pint of all of worthless rubbish and heave in some red stuff to make it beautiful the main thing and he wouldnt put down that glass to go to a circus. all the bars on this anchor line are rented and owned by one firm. they furnish the from their own establishment and hire the on salary. good yes on some of the where there are the kind of that want it and can pay for it. on the other no. nobody but the deck hands and to drink it. brandy? yes got brandy plenty of it; but you dont want any of it unless youve made your will. it as it used to be in the old times. then everybody traveled by steamboat everybody drank and everybody treated everybody else. now most everybody goes by railroad and the rest dont drink. in the old times the barkeeper owned the bar himself and was gay and smarty and talky and all jeweled up and was the aristocrat on the boat; used to make on a trip. a father who left his son a steamboat bar left him a fortune. now he leaves him board and lodging; yes and washing if a shirt a trip will do. yes indeedy times are changed. why do you know on the principal line of on the upper mississippi they dont have any bar at all! like poetry but its the petrified truth. stack island. i stack island; also lake providence louisiana which is the first distinctly town you come to level and low hung with venerable gray of spanish moss; restful pensive sunday aspect about the place uncle with feeling also with truth. a mr. h. furnished some minor details of fact concerning this region which i would have to believe if i had not known him to be a steamboat mate. he was a passenger of ours a resident of arkansas city and bound to vicksburg to join his boat a little sunflower packet. he was an austere man and had the reputation of being singularly unworldly for a river man. among other things he said that arkansas had been injured and kept back by of concerning the here. one may smile said he and turn the matter off as being a small thing; but when you come to look at the effects produced in the way of discouragement of immigration and diminished values of property it was quite the opposite of a small thing or thing in any wise to be down or at. these had been persistently represented as being formidable and lawless; whereas the truth is they are feeble insignificant in size diffident to a fault sensitive and so on and so on; you would have supposed he was talking about his family. but if he was soft on the arkansas he was hard enough on the of lake providence to make up for it those lake providence colossi as he finely them. he said that two of them could whip a dog and that four of them could hold a man down; and except help come they would kill him butcher him as he expressed it. in a sort of casual way and yet significant way to the fact that the life policy in its form is unknown in lake providence they take out a mosquito policy besides. he told many remarkable things about those lawless among said he had seen them try to vote. that this statement to be a good deal of a strain on us he modified it a little: said he might have been mistaken as to that particular but knew he had seen them around the polls canvassing. there was another passenger friend of h.s who backed up the harsh evidence against those and detailed some stirring which he had had with them. the were pretty sizable merely pretty sizable; yet mr. h. was continually interrupting with a cold inexorable wait knock off per cent. of that; now go on; or wait you are getting that too strong; cut it down cut it down you get a too much costumery on to your always dress a fact in tights never in an ulster; or pardon once more: if you are going to load anything more on to that statement you want to get a couple of and tow the rest because its drawing all the water there is in the river already; stick to just stick to the cold what these want for a book is the frozen truth aint that so he privately that it was necessary to watch this man all the time and keep him within bounds; it would not do to neglect this precaution as he mr. h. knew to his sorrow. said he i will not deceive you; he told me such a monstrous lie once that it swelled my left ear up and spread it so that i was actually not able to see out around it; it so for and people came miles to see me fan myself with it. we used to plow past the lofty vicksburg downstream; but we cannot do that now. a cutoff made a country town of it like st. genevieve and several there is water also a big island in front of vicksburg now. you come down the river the other side of the island then turn and come up to the town; that is in high water: in low water you cant come up but must land some distance below it. and still remain as of tremendous war crippled by the cannon in the clay the did good service during the six bombardment of the city may to july . they were used by the mainly by the and not to live in constantly but to fly to for safety on occasion. they were mere driven into the perpendicular clay bank then branched y shape within the hill. life in vicksburg during the six was perhaps but wait; here are some out of which to reproduce it: population thousand and three thousand the city utterly cut off from the world walled solidly in the frontage by the rear by and hence no buying and selling with the outside; no passing to and fro; no a parting guest no welcoming a coming one; no printed acres of worldwide news to be read at breakfast mornings a tedious dull absence of such matter instead; hence also no running to see smoking into view in the distance up or down and plowing toward the town for none came the river lay vacant and undisturbed; no rush and turmoil around the railway station no struggling over bewildered of by noisy of all quiet there; flour two hundred a barrel sugar thirty corn ten a bushel bacon five a pound rum a hundred a gallon; other things in proportion: consequently no roar and racket of and tearing along the streets; nothing for them to do among that handful of of exhausted means; at three oclock in the morning silence; silence so dead that the measured tramp of a sentinel can be heard a seemingly impossible distance; out of hearing of this lonely sound perhaps the stillness is absolute: all in a moment come of artillery the sky is with the red streaming from soaring and a rain of iron upon the city; upon the empty streets: streets which are not empty a moment later but mottled with dim of frantic and scurrying from home and bed toward the cave encouraged by the humorous grim soldiery who shout to your and laugh. the scream and crash overhead the iron rain down one hour two hours three possibly six then stops; silence but the streets are still empty; the silence a head from a cave here and there and yonder and cautiously; the silence still continuing follow and jaded half smothered group themselves about stretch their cramped draw in deep draughts of the grateful fresh air gossip with the from the next cave; maybe straggle off home presently or take a lounge through the town if the stillness and will scurry to the again when the forth once more. there being but three thousand of these merely the population of a village would they not come to know each other after a week or two and familiarly; insomuch that the fortunate or unfortunate of one would be of interest to all? those are the furnished by history. from them might not almost anybody reproduce for himself the life of that time in vicksburg? could you who did not experience it come nearer to it to the imagination of another nonparticipant than could a who did experience it? it impossible; and yet there are why it might not really be. when one his first voyage in a ship it is an experience which multitudinously with striking which are in such sharp contrast with all this former that they take a seemingly deathless grip upon his imagination and memory. by tongue or pen he can make a landsman live that strange and stirring voyage over with him; make him see it all and feel it all. but if he wait? if he make ten in succession what then? why the thing lost color snap surprise; and become commonplace. the man would have nothing to tell that would quicken a pulse. years ago i with a couple of the vicksburg a man and his wife. left to tell their story in their own way those people told it without fire almost without interest. a week of their wonderful life there would have made their eloquent for ever perhaps; but they had six of it and that wore the novelty all out; they got used to being out of home and into the ground; the matter commonplace. after that the possibility of their ever being startlingly interesting in their talks about it was gone. what the man said was to this effect: it got to be sunday all the time. seven in the week to us anyway. we anything to do and time hung heavy. seven and all of them broken up at one time or another in the day or in the night by a few hours of the awful storm of fire and thunder and iron. at first we used to shin for the a good deal faster than we did afterwards. the first time i forgot the and maria fetched them both along. when she was all safe in the cave she two or three afterwards when she was running for the one morning through a a big shell burst near her and covered her all over with dirt and a piece of the iron carried away her gamebag of false hair from the back of her head. well she stopped to get that gamebag before she along again! was getting used to things already you see. we all got so that we could tell a good deal about and after that we didnt always go under shelter if it was a light shower. us men would loaf around and talk; and a man would say there she goes! and name the kind of shell it was from the sound of it and go on talking if there wasnt any danger from it. if a shell was close over us we stopped talking and stood still; uncomfortable yes but it wasnt safe to move. when it let go we went on talking again if nobody hurt maybe saying that was a ripper! or some such commonplace comment before we or maybe we would see a shell itself away high in the air overhead. in that case every fellow just whipped out a sudden see you again and often and often i saw of ladies the streets looking as cheerful as you please and keeping an eye canted up watching the and seen them stop still when they were uncertain about what a shell was going to do and wait and make certain; and after that they along again or lit out for shelter according to the verdict. streets in some have a litter of of paper and odds and of one sort or another lying around. ours they had iron litter. sometimes a man would gather up all the iron and in his neighborhood and pile them into a kind of monument in his front yard a ton of it sometimes. no glass left; glass stand such a bombardment; it was all out. windows of the vacant like in a skull. whole were as scarce as news. we had church not many there along at first; but pretty good seen service stop a minute and everybody sit quiet no voice heard pretty then and all the more so on account of the awful boom and crash going on outside and overhead; and pretty soon when a body could be heard service would go on again. organs and mixed up with a bombardment is a powerful queer combination along at first. coming out of church one morning we had an accident the only one that around me on a sunday. i was just a hearty handshake with a friend i seen for a while and saying drop into our cave tonight after bombardment; weve got hold of a pint of prime . whiskey i was going to say you know but a shell interrupted. a chunk of it cut the mans arm off and left it dangling in my hand. and do you know the thing that is going to stick the longest in my memory and outlast everything else little and big i reckon is the mean thought i had then? it was the whiskey is saved. and yet dont you know it was kind of excusable; because it was as scarce as and we had only just that little; never had another taste during the siege. sometimes the were desperately crowded and always hot and close. sometimes a cave had twenty or people packed into it; no for anybody; air so foul sometimes you have made a candle burn in it. a child was born in one of those one night think of that; why it was like it born in a trunk. twice we had sixteen people in our cave; and a number of times we had a dozen. pretty suffocating in there. we always had eight; eight there. hunger and misery and sickness and fright and sorrow and i dont know what all got so loaded into them that none of them were ever rightly their old after the siege. they all but three of us within a couple of years. one night a shell burst in front of the hole and it in and stopped it up. it was lively times for a while digging out. some of us came near smothering. after that we made two ought to have thought of it at first. mule meat. no we only got down to that the last day or two. of course it was good; anything is good when you are starving. this man had kept a diary during six no only the first six days. the first day eight close the second five; the third one loosely written; the fourth three or four a line or two the fifth and sixth days; seventh day diary abandoned; life in terrific vicksburg now become commonplace and matter of course. the war history of vicksburg more about it to interest the general reader than that of any other of the it is full of variety full of incident full of the picturesque. vicksburg held out longer than any other important and saw warfare in all its phases both land and water the siege the mine the assault the repulse the bombardment sickness captivity famine. the most beautiful of all the national is here. over the great gateway is this inscription: here rest in peace who for their country in the years to . the grounds are nobly situated; being very high and commanding a wide prospect of land and river. they are tastefully laid out in broad with winding roads and and there is profuse adornment in the way of semitropical and and in one part is a piece of native left just as it grew and therefore perfect in its charm. everything about this cemetery the hand of the national government. the work is always conspicuous for excellence solidity thoroughness neatness. the government does its work well in the first place and then care of it. by which were often cut to so great a depth between perpendicular that they were mere roofless we drove out a mile or two and the monument which upon the scene of the surrender of vicksburg to general grant by general its metal will preserve it from the and which so its predecessor which was of marble; but the brick are and it will tumble down it a picturesque region of wooded and and is not unpicturesque itself being well smothered in flowering weeds. the battered remnant of the marble monument been removed to the national cemetery. on the road a quarter of a mile townward an aged colored man us with pride an unexploded bombshell which lain in his yard since the day it fell there during the siege. i was an de dog was de dog he went for de shell gwine to pick a fuss wid it; but i didnt; i make at home lay still you is or bust up de place as a mind to but is got business out in de woods i vicksburg is a town of substantial business streets and pleasant it the commerce of the yazoo and sunflower is pushing in several through rich agricultural and a promising future of prosperity and importance. apparently nearly all the river big and little have made up their that they must look mainly to for wealth and henceforth. they are acting upon this idea. the are that the next twenty years will bring about some noteworthy in the valley in the direction of increased population and wealth and in the intellectual advancement and the of opinion which go naturally with these. and yet if one may judge by the past the river will manage to find and use a chance here and there to cripple and retard their progress. they kept themselves back in the days of steamboating supremacy by a system of so stupidly graded as to prohibit what may be small retail traffic in and were charged such heavy wharfage that they could not afford to land for one or two or a light lot of freight. instead of encouraging the bringing of trade to their the diligently and effectively discouraged it. they could have had many and low rates; but their policy few and high rates compulsory. it was a policy which extended and from new orleans to st. paul. we had a strong desire to make a trip up the yazoo and the sunflower an interesting region at any time but additionally interesting at this time because up there the great inundation was still to be seen in force but we were nearly sure to have to wait a day or more for a new orleans boat on our return; so we were obliged to give up the project. here is a story which i picked up on board the boat that night. i insert it in this place merely because it is a good story not because it here for it doesnt. it was told by a passenger a college professor and was to the surface in the course of a general conversation which with talk about into talk about astronomy then into talk about the lynching of the in vicksburg half a century ago then into talk about and and ended after midnight in a dispute over free trade and protection. it was in the early days. i was not a college professor then. i was a young with the world before me to survey in case anybody wanted it done. i had a contract to survey a route for a great in california and i was on my way thither by sea a three or four voyage. there were a good many but i had very little to say to them; reading and dreaming were my and i conversation in order to indulge these there were three professional on board rough repulsive i never had any talk with them yet i could not help seeing them with some frequency for they in an stateroom every day and night and in my i often had of them through their door which stood a little ajar to let out the surplus tobacco smoke and profanity. they were an evil and hateful presence but i had to put up with it of course there was one other passenger who fell under my eye a good deal for he determined to be friendly with me and i could not have gotten rid of him without running some chance of hurting his feelings and i was far from wishing to do that. besides there was something engaging in his countrified simplicity and his beaming the first time i saw this mr. john i from his clothes and his that he was a grazier or farmer from the backwoods of some western state doubtless ohio and afterward when he into his personal history and i discovered that he was a from interior ohio i was so pleased with my own penetration that i warmed toward him for verifying my instinct. he got to dropping alongside me every day after breakfast to help me make my promenade; and so in the course of time his jaw had told me everything about his business his his family his his politics in fact everything that concerned a living or dead. and meantime i think he had to get out of me everything i knew about my trade my tribe my my and myself. he was a gentle and persuasive genius and this thing it; for i was not given to talking about my i said something about triangulation once; the stately word pleased his ear; he what it meant; i after that he quietly and inoffensively ignored my name and always me triangle. what an enthusiast he was in cattle! at the bare name of a bull or a cow his eye would light and his eloquent tongue would turn itself loose. as long as i would walk and listen he would walk and talk; he knew all he loved all he them all with his affectionate tongue. i along in voiceless misery whilst the cattle question was up; when i could endure it no longer i used to deftly insert a scientific topic into the conversation; then my eye fired and his faded; my tongue his stopped; life was a joy to me and a sadness to him. one day he said a little hesitatingly and with somewhat of diffidence triangle would you mind coming down to my stateroom a minute and have a little talk on a certain matter? i went with him at once. there he put his head out up and down the saloon warily then closed the door and locked it. he sat down on the sofa and he said agoing to make a little proposition to you and if it you favorable be a middling good thing for both of us. you aint agoing out to for fun am i its business aint that so? well you can do me a good turn and so can i you if we see fit. and scraped and saved a considerable many years and got it all here. he unlocked an old hair trunk tumbled a chaos of shabby clothes aside and drew a short stout bag into view for a moment then buried it again and the trunk. dropping his voice to a cautious low tone he continued all there a round ten thousand in now this is my little idea: what i dont know about raising cattle aint worth knowing. theres of money in it in well i know and you know that all along a line that s being there s little of land that they call that fall to the surveyor free gratis for nothing. all youve got to do on your side is to survey in such a way that the will fall on good fat land then you turn em over to me i stock em with cattle in the cash i plank out your share of the regular right along and i was sorry to wither his blooming enthusiasm but it could not be i interrupted and said severely i am not that kind of a surveyor. let us change the subject mr. it was pitiful to see his confusion and hear his awkward and shamefaced i was as much distressed as he was especially as he so far from suspected that there was anything improper in his proposition. so i to console him and lead him on to forget his mishap in a conversational orgy about cattle and butchery. we were lying at acapulco; and as we went on deck it luckily that the crew were just beginning to hoist some aboard in melancholy vanished instantly and with it the memory of his late mistake. now only look at that! cried he; my goodness triangle what would they say to it in ohio. wouldnt their eyes bug out to see em handled like that? wouldnt they though? all the were on deck to look even the and knew them all and had afflicted them all with his pet topic. as i moved away i saw one of the approach and accost him; then another of them; then the third. i watched; the conversation continued between the four men; it grew earnest; drew gradually away; the and kept at his elbow. i was uncomfortable. however as they me presently i heard say with a tone of annoyance but it aint any use i tell you again as told you a half a dozen times before i warnt raised to it and i aint agoing to it. i felt relieved. his level head will be his sufficient protection i said to myself. during the run from acapulco to san francisco i several times saw the talking earnestly with and once i threw out a gentle warning to him. he comfortably and said oh yes! they tag around after me considerable want me to play a little just for amusement they say but if my folks have told me once to look out for that sort of livestock told me a thousand times i reckon. in due course we were approaching san francisco. it was an ugly black night with a strong wind blowing but there was not much sea. i was on deck alone. toward ten i below. a figure from the den and in the darkness. i experienced a shock for i was sure it was i flew down the companionway about for him could not find him then returned to the deck just in time to catch a glimpse of him as he that confounded nest of rascality. had he at last? i feared it. what had he gone below for? his bag of coin? possibly. i drew near the door full of it was and i in and saw a sight that made me bitterly wish i had given my attention to saving my poor instead of reading and dreaming my foolish time away. he was gambling. worse still he was being plied with champagne and was already showing some effect from it. he the cider as he it and said now that he had got a taste of it he almost he would drink it if it was spirits it was so good and so ahead of anything he had ever run across before. surreptitious at this from one rascal to another and they filled all the glasses and whilst honestly drained his to the bottom they pretended to do the same but threw the wine over their i could not bear the scene so i forward and tried to interest myself in the sea and the of the wind. but no my uneasy spirit kept dragging me back at and always i saw drinking his wine fairly and squarely and the throwing theirs away. it was the night i ever spent. the only hope i had was that we might reach our anchorage with speed that would break up the game. i the ship along all i could with my at last we went booming through the golden gate and my for joy. i hurried back to that door and in. alas there was small room for hope eyes were heavy and bloodshot his sweaty face was crimson his speech maudlin and thick his body sawed drunkenly about with the weaving motion of the ship. he drained another glass to the dregs whilst the cards were being dealt. he took his hand at it and his dull eyes lit up for a moment. the observed it and their gratification by hardly perceptible one villain hank discarded one card the three each. the betting heretofore the had been trifling a dollar or two; but off with an eagle now a moment then saw it and went ten better. the other two threw up their hands. i see that and go you a hundred better! then and for the money. cover it? well i reckon i am and lay another hundred on top of it too. oh thats your little game is it? i see your raise and raise it five hundred! said five hundred better. said the foolish and out the amount and it on the pile. the three hardly tried to conceal their exultation. all diplomacy and pretense were now and the sharp came thick and fast and the yellow pyramid grew higher and higher. at last ten thousand lay in view. cast a bag of coin on the table and said with mocking gentleness five thousand better my friend from the rural what do you say now? i call you! said heaving his golden on the pile. what have you got? four you d d fool! and threw down his cards and surrounded the stakes with his arms. four you ass! covering his man with a cocked revolver. a professional gambler myself and been laying for you all this voyage! well well it is a sad world. one of the three was pal. it was he that dealt the fateful hands. according to an understanding with the two he was to have given four queens but alas he didnt. a week later i upon arrayed in the height of fashion in montgomery street. he said cheerily as we were parting ah you mind about those i dont really know anything about cattle except what i was able to pick up in a apprenticeship over in jersey just before we sailed. my and have their turn i shant need them any more. next day we reluctantly parted from the gold dust and her to see that boat and all those again some day. a thing which the were to render tragically impossible! for three later august while i was writing one of these foregoing the new york papers brought this telegram the steamer gold dust exploded her at three oclock today just after leaving were scalded and seventeen are missing. the boat was landed in the eddy just above the town and through the of the the cabin and part of the crew and deck were taken ashore and removed to the and of the injured were lying in drygoods store at one time where they received every attention before being removed to more comfortable a list of the names whereby it that of the seventeen dead one was the barkeeper; and among the wounded were the captain chief mate second mate and second and third also mr. lem s. gray pilot and several of the crew. in answer to a private telegram we learned that none of these was severely hurt except mr. gray. letters received afterward confirmed this news and said that mr. gray was improving and would get well. later letters spoke less hopefully of his case; and finally came one his death. a good man a most companionable and manly man and worthy of a fate. we took passage in a cincinnati boat for new orleans; or on a cincinnati boat either is correct; the former is the eastern form of putting it the latter the western. mr. dickens declined to agree that the mississippi were magnificent or that they were floating terms which had always been applied to them; terms which did not overexpress the admiration with which the people them. mr. position was unassailable possibly; the peoples position was certainly unassailable. if mr. dickens was comparing these with the crown or with the taj or with the matterhorn; or with some other priceless or wonderful thing which he had seen they were not magnificent he was right. the people them with what they had seen; and thus measured thus the were magnificent the term was the correct one it was not at all too strong. the people were as right as was mr. dickens. the were finer than anything on shore. with superior and in the valley they were indubitably magnificent they were to a few people living in new orleans and st. louis they were not magnificent perhaps; not but to the great majority of those and to the entire spread over both banks between baton rouge and st. louis they were they with the dream of what magnificence was and satisfied it. every town and village along that vast stretch of double had a best dwelling dwelling mansion the home of its and most conspicuous citizen. it is easy to describe it: large grassy yard with paling fence painted white in fair repair; brick walk from gate to door; big square frame house painted white and porticoed like a grecian temple with this difference that the imposing fluted and corinthian were a pathetic sham being made of white pine and painted; iron knocker; brass door knob discolored for lack of polishing. within an uncarpeted hall of boards; opening out of it a parlor fifteen by fifteen in some five or ten larger; ingrain carpet; mahogany lamp on it with shade standing on a gridiron so to speak made of by the young ladies of the house and a several piled and disposed with exactness according to an inherited and unchangeable plan; among them much penciled; also offering and wreath with their sappy in also ossian; alonzo and melissa: maybe also album full of original poetry of the breed; two or three works shepherd of salisbury plain current number of the chaste and innocuous book with painted of with all alike and the same size each woman with a wedge sticking from under her dress and to be half of her foot. polished airtight stove new and deadly invention with pipe passing through a board which up the discarded good old fireplace. on each end of the wooden mantel over the fireplace a large basket of and other natural size all done in plaster rudely or in wax and painted to resemble the which they dont. over middle of mantel engraving washington crossing the delaware; on the wall by the door copy of it done in by one of the young ladies work of art which would have made washington hesitate about crossing if he could have what advantage was going to be taken of it. piano kettle in disguise with music bound and unbound piled on it and on a stand near by: battle of prague; bird waltz; arkansas traveler; rosin the bow; marseilles hymn; on a lone barren isle st. helena; the last link is broken; she wore a wreath of the night when last we met; go forget me why should sorrow oer that brow a shadow fling; hours there were to memory long long ago; days of absence; a life on the ocean wave a home on the rolling deep; bird at sea; and spread open on the rack where the plaintive singer left it on silver guide the his way tilted pensively against the piano a guitar guitar capable of playing the spanish fandango by itself if you give it a start. frantic work of art on the wall pious motto done on the premises sometimes in colored sometimes in faded progenitor of the god bless our home of modern commerce. framed in black on the wall other works of arts and committed on the premises by the young ladies; being grim mostly: lake solitary sailboat petrified pregeological on shore anthracite precipice; name of criminal conspicuous in the corner. lithograph napoleon crossing the alps. lithograph the grave at st. helena. battle of bunker hill and the sally from gibraltar. moses smiting the rock and return of the prodigal son. in big gilt frame slander of the family in oil: papa holding a book constitution of the united guitar leaning against mamma blue fluttering from its neck; the young ladies as in and scalloped one embracing toy horse the other beguiling kitten with ball of yarn and both up at mamma who back. these all fresh raw and red apparently skinned. opposite in gilt frame grandpa and grandma at thirty and stiff glaring pallidly out from a background of solid egyptian night. under a glass french clock dome large bouquet of stiff done in wax. pyramidal whatnot in the corner the occupied chiefly with of the period disposed with an eye to best effect: shell with the prayer carved on it; another shell of the sort narrow straight orifice three long running from end to end portrait of washington carved on it; not well done; the shell had mouth originally artist should have built to that. these two are of the bridal trip to new orleans and the french market. other californian quartz with gold wart old locket with circlet of ancestral hair in it; indian of flint; pair of bead from uncle who crossed the three alum of various colors being of wire with of crystallized alum in the style works of art which were by the young ladies; their doubles and to be found upon all in the land; convention of desiccated and pinned to a card; painted seated upon its under jaw and when pressed upon; rabbit and merged together not strongly defined; pewter medal; miniature cardboard to be attached to the stovepipe and by the heat; small napoleon done in wax; of dim and in all but customary no templed portico at back and manufactured landscape stretching away in the distance that came in later with the photograph; all these vague lavishly chained and ringed metal and from doubt by stripes and of vivid gold bronze; all of them too much combed too much fixed up; and all of them uncomfortable in inflexible of a pattern which the spectator cannot realize could ever have been in fashion; husband and wife generally grouped together husband sitting wife standing with hand on his shoulder and both all these fading years some traceable effect of the brisk now smile if you please! over whatnot place of special sacredness an outrage in watercolor done by the young niece that came on a visit long ago and pity too; for she might have of this in time. horsehair horsehair sofa which sliding from under you. window shades of oil stuff with and ruined on them in fierce colors. dependent from gaudy of beaten tin gilded. with rag of the corded sort with a sag in the middle the cords needing tightening; snuffy featherbed not aired often enough; rocker; on wall size frame; inherited bureau; washbowl and pitcher possibly but not certainly; brass candlestick tallow candle snuffers. nothing else in the room. not a bathroom in the house; and no visitor likely to come along who ever seen one. that was the residence of the principal citizen all the way from the of new orleans to the edge of st. louis. when he stepped aboard a big fine steamboat he a new and marvelous world: cut to counterfeit a spraying crown of and maybe painted red; pilothouse hurricane deck all garnished with white wooden filigree work of fanciful gilt topping the gilt over the big bell; gaudy symbolical picture on the possibly; big roomy painted blue and furnished with windsor inside a cabin; porcelain knob and on every stateroom door; curving of touched up with gilding stretching overhead all down the converging vista; big every little way each an april shower of glittering lovely falling everywhere from the colored glazing of the the whole a resplendent tunnel a bewildering and spectacle! in the ladies cabin a pink and white wilton carpet as soft as mush and glorified with a ravishing pattern of gigantic then the bridal chamber the animal that that idea was still alive and unhanged at that day bridal chamber whose pretentious flummery was necessarily to the now tottering intellect of that citizen. every stateroom had its couple of cozy clean and perhaps a and a snug closet; and sometimes there was even a washbowl and pitcher and part of a towel which could be told from mosquito netting by an expert though generally these things were absent and the themselves at a long row of stationary bowls in the barber shop where were also public public and public soap. take the steamboat which i have just described and you have her in her highest and and most pleasing and comfortable and satisfactory estate. now cake her over with a layer of ancient and obdurate dirt and you have the cincinnati steamer awhile ago to. not all over only inside; for she was ably in all except the but wash that boat and repaint her and she would be about the counterpart of the most boat of the old flush times: for the steamboat architecture of the west no change; neither steamboat furniture and ornamentation any. where the river in the vicksburg region used to be it is now comparatively straight made so by cutoff; a former distance of seventy miles is reduced to it is a change which threw neighbor delta louisiana out into the country and ended its career as a river town. its whole is now occupied by a vast sandbar thickly covered with young a growth which will magnify itself into a dense forest and completely hide the town. in due time we grand gulf and rodney of war fame and natchez the last of the beautiful for baton rouge yet to come is not on a hill but only on high ground. famous not changed notably in twenty years; in outward aspect judging by the of the ancient procession of foreign it not changed in sixty; for it is still small straggling and shabby. it had a desperate reputation morally in the old and early steamboating times plenty of drinking carousing and killing there among the riffraff of the river in those days. but is attractive; always been attractive. even mrs. trollope had to confess its at one or two the wearisome level line is relieved by as they call the short of high ground. the town of natchez is beautifully situated on one of those high spots. the contrast that its bright green hill with the dismal line of black forest that on every side the abundant growth of the pawpaw palmetto and orange the copious variety of that flourish there all make it appear like an oasis in the desert. natchez is the furthest point to the north at which ripen in the open air or endure the winter without shelter. with the exception of this sweet spot i thought all the little and we in the extreme. natchez like her near and far river now and is to them pushing them hither and thither into all rich outlying that are naturally tributary to her. and like vicksburg and new orleans she her she thirty tons of ice a day. in vicksburg and natchez in my time ice was jewelry; none but the rich could wear it. but anybody and everybody can have it now. i one of the in new orleans to see what the polar might look like when lugged into the edge of the tropics. but there was nothing striking in the aspect of the place. it was merely a spacious house with some innocent steam machinery in one end of it and some big porcelain running here and there. no not porcelain they merely to be; they were iron but the ammonia which was being breathed through them had coated them to the thickness of your hand with solid ice. it ought to have melted; for one did not require winter clothing in that atmosphere: but it did not melt; the inside of the pipe was too cold. sunk into the floor were numberless tin a foot square and two long and open at the top end. these were full of clear water; and around each box salt and other proper stuff was packed; also the ammonia were applied to the water in some way which will always remain a secret to me because i was not able to understand the process. while the water in the gradually froze men gave it a stir or two with a stick occasionally to liberate the i think. other men were continually lifting out whose contents had become hard frozen. they gave the box a single dip into a vat of boiling water to melt the block of ice free from its tin coffin then they shot the block out upon a platform car and it was ready for market. these big were hard solid and in certain of them big of fresh and brilliant tropical had been in beautiful french and other pretty these were to be set on end in a platter in the center of to cool the tropical air; and also to be ornamental for the and things imprisoned in them could be seen as through plate glass. i was told that this factory could retail its ice by wagon throughout new orleans in the at six or seven a ton and make a sufficient profit. this being the case there is business for in the north; for we get ice on no such terms there if one take less than three hundred and fifty at a delivery. the rosalie yarn mill of natchez a capacity of and and hands. the natchez cotton mills company operations four years ago in a building of x with and capital all subscribed in the town. two years later the same increased their capital to ; added a third story to the mill increased its length to added machinery to increase the capacity to and the company now employ many of whom are of natchez. the mill works of cotton annually and the best standard quality of brown and and turning out of these goods per new orleans aug . a close corporation stock held at per share but none in the market. the in the mississippi river are great and strange yet were to be expected; but i was not to live to see natchez and these other river become manufacturing and railway speaking of me of a talk upon that topic which i heard which i on board the cincinnati boat. i awoke out of a fretted sleep with a dull confusion of in my i two men were talking; subject apparently the great inundation. i out through the open transom. the two men were eating a late breakfast; sitting opposite each other; nobody else around. they closed up the inundation with a few words used it evidently as a mere icebreaker and then they into business. it soon that they were one belonging in cincinnati the other in new orleans. brisk men energetic of movement and speech; the dollar their god how to get it their religion. now as to this article said cincinnati slashing into the ostensible butter and holding forward a slab of it on his its from our house; look at it smell of it taste it. put any test on it you want to. take your own time no hurry make it thorough. there now what do you say? butter aint it. not by a thundering sight its oleomargarine! yes sir thats what it is oleomargarine. you cant tell it from butter; by george an expert cant. its from our house. we supply most of the in the west; theres hardly a pound of butter on one of them. we are crawling right along jumping right along is the word. we are going to have that entire trade. yes and the hotel trade too. you are going to see the day pretty soon when you cant find an ounce of butter to bless yourself with in any hotel in the mississippi and ohio outside of the biggest why we are turning out oleomargarine now by the of tons. and we can sell it so that the whole country got to take it cant get around it you see. butter dont stand any show there aint any chance for competition. had its day and from this out butter goes to the wall. theres more money in oleomargarine than why you cant imagine the business we do. stopped in every town from cincinnati to natchez; and sent home big from every one of them. and and soon for ten minutes longer in the same fervid strain. then new orleans piped up and said yes its a imitation thats a certainty; but it aint the only one around thats for instance they make out of cottonseed oil nowadays so that you cant tell them apart. yes thats so cincinnati and it was a tiptop business for a while. they sent it over and brought it back from france and italy with the united customhouse mark on it to indorse it for genuine and there was no end of cash in it; but france and italy broke up the game of course they naturally would. cracked on such a rattling impost that cottonseed stand the raise; had to hang up and quit. goes to his stateroom back a couple of long and out the there now smell them taste them examine the inspect the one of ms from europe the never been out of this country. european the american cottonseed tell m apart? course you cant. nobody can. people that want to can go to the expense and trouble of shipping their to europe and back its their privilege; but our firm a trick worth six of that. we turn out the whole thing clean from the word go in our factory in new orleans: oil everything. well no not been buying them abroad get them there. you see theres just one little wee speck essence or whatever it is in a gallon of cottonseed oil that give it a smell or a flavor or something get that out and all right perfectly easy then to turn the oil into any kind of oil you want to and there aint anybody that can detect the true from the false. well we know how to get that one little particle out and were the only firm that does. and we turn out an that is just simply perfect undetectable! we are doing a ripping trade too as i could easily show you by my for this trip. maybe butter bread pretty soon but well cottonseed his salad for him from the gulf to canada and thats a thing. cincinnati and with admiration. the two exchanged and rose. as they left the table cincinnati said but you have to have customhouse marks dont you? how do you manage that? we port hudson scene of two of the most terrific of the war the there between fleet and the confederate land april th ; and the memorable land battle two later which eight hours eight hours of exceptionally fierce and stubborn fighting and ended finally in the repulse of the union with great slaughter. baton rouge was clothed in like a bride no much more so; like a greenhouse. for we were in the absolute south now no no no halfway the in the capitol grounds were lovely and fragrant with their dense rich foliage and huge snowball the scent of the flower is very sweet but you want distance on it because it is so powerful. they are not good bedroom they might suffocate one in his sleep. we were certainly in the south at last; for here the sugar region and the vast green with and negro quarters clustered together in the middle distance were in view. and there was a tropical sun overhead and a tropical swelter in the air. and at this point also the paradise: a wide river hence to new orleans abundance of water from shore to shore and no bars or in his road. sir walter scott is probably responsible for the capitol building; for it is not conceivable that this little sham castle would ever have been built if he had not run the people mad a couple of ago with his medieval the south not yet recovered from the debilitating influence of his admiration of his fantastic and their grotesque chivalry doings and romantic still here in an atmosphere in which is already perceptible the wholesome and practical smell of and and of its inflated language and other windy survive along with it. it is pathetic enough that a whitewashed castle with and things all ungenuine within and without pretending to be what they are not should ever have been built in this otherwise honorable place; but it is much more pathetic to see this architectural falsehood undergoing restoration and perpetuation in our day when it would have been so easy to let dynamite finish what a charitable fire and then devote this to the building of something genuine. baton rouge no patent on imitation however and no monopoly of them. here is a picture from the advertisement of the female institute of columbia; tennessee. the following remark is from the same advertisement the institute building long been famed as a model of striking and beautiful architecture. are charmed with its resemblance to the old of song and story with its turreted and keeping school in a castle is a romantic thing; as romantic as keeping hotel in a castle. by itself the imitation castle is doubtless harmless and well enough; but as a symbol and breeder and sustainer of maudlin romanticism here in the midst of the and and infinitely greatest and worthiest of all the the world seen it is necessarily a hurtful thing and a mistake. here is an extract from the prospectus of a kentucky female college. female college well enough; but since the phrasing it in that unjustifiable way was done purely in the interest of brevity it to me that would have been still better because shorter and means the same thing: that is if either phrase means anything at all the president is southern by birth by rearing by education and by sentiment; the are all southern in sentiment and with the exception of those born in europe were born and raised in the south. believing the southern to be the highest type of civilization this continent seen the young ladies are trained according to the southern of delicacy refinement womanhood religion and propriety; hence we offer a female college for the south and solicit southern patronage. knoxville october . this morning a few minutes after ten oclock general joseph a. thomas and joseph a. jr. were in a shooting affray. the difficulty yesterday afternoon by general attacking major and threatening to kill him. this was at the fair grounds and told that it was not the place to settle their then told he should not live. it that was armed and was not. the cause of the difficulty was an old feud about the transfer of some property from to later in the afternoon sent word to that he would kill him on sight. this morning major was standing in the door of the mechanics national bank of which he was president. general and another gentleman down gay street on the opposite side from the bank. stepped into the bank got a shot gun took deliberate aim at general and fired. fell dead being shot in the left side. as he fell fired again the shot taking effect in thigh. then into the bank and got another shot gun. about this time joseph a. jr. son of general came rushing down the street unseen by until within forty when the young man fired a pistol the shot taking effect in right breast passing through the body near the heart. the instant shot turned and fired the load taking effect in young right breast and side. fell pierced with twenty buckshot and almost instantly fell dead without a struggle. tried to rise but fell back dead. the whole tragedy within two minutes and neither of the three spoke after he was shot. general had about thirty buckshot in his body. a bystander was painfully wounded in the thigh with a buckshot and another was wounded in the arm. four other men had their clothing pierced by buckshot. the affair great excitement and gay street was thronged with of people. general and his son joe were acquitted only a few days ago of the murder of moses and don father and son whom they a few ago. will was by don last christmas. major thomas was president of the mechanics national bank here and was the man in the state. associated press telegram. one day last month professor of the female college a quiet and gentlemanly man was told that his a captain burton had threatened to kill him. burton it had already one man and driven his knife into another. the professor armed himself with a shot gun out in search of his found him playing billiards in a saloon and his brains out. the memphis avalanche that the course met with pretty general approval in the community; knowing that the law was powerless in the actual condition of public sentiment to protect him he protected himself. about the same time two young men in north carolina quarreled about a girl and hostile were exchanged. tried to reconcile them but had their labor for their pains. on the th the young men met in the public highway. one of them had a heavy club in his hand the other an ax. the man with the club fought desperately for his life but it was a hopeless fight from the first. a blow sent his club whirling out of his grasp and the next moment he was a dead man. about the same time two highly connected young in a hardware store at while came to peter dick threw pepper in charles eyes; roads an apology; dick to give it and it was agreed that a duel was inevitable but a difficulty arose; the had no and it was too late at night to procure them. one of them that would answer the purpose and the other accepted the suggestion; the result was that roads fell to the floor with a gash in his abdomen that may or may not prove fatal. if dick been the news not us. he expressed deep regret and we are told by a correspondent of the philadelphia press that every effort been made to hush the matter up. from the public what warder ho! the man that can blow so complacent a blast as that probably it from a castle. from baton rouge to new orleans the great sugar border both sides of the river all the way and stretch their back to the dim of bearded cypress in the rear. lonely no longer. plenty of all the way on both banks standing so close together for long that the broad river lying between the two becomes a sort of spacious street. a most homelike and region. and now and then you see a pillared and porticoed great in here is testimony of one or two of the procession of foreign that along here half a century ago. mrs. trollope the unbroken flatness of the banks of the mississippi continued unvaried for many miles above new orleans; but the graceful and luxuriant palmetto the dark and noble ilex and the bright orange were everywhere to be seen and it was many days before we were weary of looking at them. the district of country which adjacent to the mississippi in the lower parts of louisiana is everywhere thickly peopled by sugar whose showy gay trig and numerous all clean and neat gave an exceedingly thriving air to the river scenery. all the procession paint the attractive picture in the same way. the of fifty years ago do not need to have a word changed in order to exactly describe the same region as it today except as to the trigness of the the whitewash is gone from the negro now; and many possibly most of the big once so shining white have worn out their paint and have a decayed neglected look. it is the blight of the war. years ago everything was trim and trig and bright along the coast just as it had been in as described by those unfortunate people them with stupid and silly and then at them for believing and printing the same. they told mrs. trollope that the or as she them were terrible and backed up the statement with a bloodcurdling account of how one of these crept into a squatter cabin one night and ate up a woman and five the woman by herself would have satisfied any alligator; but no these must make him gorge the five besides. one would not imagine that of this robust breed would be sensitive but they were. it is difficult at this day to understand and impossible to justify the reception which the book of the grave honest intelligent gentle manly charitable basil hall got. the to new orleans were familiar; general were unchanged. when one goes flying through london along a railway in the air on tall arches he may inspect miles of upper through the open windows but the lower half of the is under his level and out of sight. similarly in stage in the new orleans region the water is up to the top of the enclosing the flat country behind it low the bottom of a dish and as the boat along high on the flood one down upon the and into the upper windows. there is nothing but that frail breastwork of earth between the people and destruction. the old brick clustered at the upper end of the city as they had always which had had a kind of lamp experience however since i had seen them; for when the war broke out the proprietor went to bed one night leaving them packed with of of vulgar salt worth a couple of a sack and got up in the morning and found his mountain of salt turned into a mountain of gold so to speak so suddenly and to so dizzy a height had the war news sent up the price of the article. the vast reach of plank unchanged and there were as many as ever: but the long array of had vanished; not altogether of course but not much of it was left. the city itself had not changed to the eye. it had greatly increased in spread and population but the look of the town was not altered. the dust was still deep in the streets; the deep troughlike alongside the were still half full of reposeful water with a dusty surface; the were still in the sugar and bacon region encumbered by and barrels and the great of austerely plain commercial were as as ever. canal street was finer and more attractive and stirring than formerly with its drifting of people its several of hurrying and toward evening its broad crowded with and ladies clothed according to the latest mode. not that there is any architecture in canal street: to speak in broad general terms there is no architecture in new orleans except in the it a strange thing to say of a wealthy farseeing and energetic city of a quarter of a million but it is true. there is a huge granite u.s. customhouse costly enough genuine enough but as a decoration it is inferior to a gasometer. it like a state prison. but it was built before the war. architecture in america may be said to have been born since the war. new orleans i believe had the good luck and in a sense the bad luck to have had no great fire in late years. it must be so. if the opposite had been the case i think one would be able to tell the burnt district by the radical improvement in its architecture over the old one can do this in boston and chicago. the burnt district of boston was commonplace before the fire; but now there is no commercial district in any city in the world that can surpass it or perhaps even rival it in beauty elegance and tastefulness. however new orleans begun just this moment as one may say. when completed the new cotton exchange will be a stately and beautiful building; massive substantial full of architectural no or false or about it anywhere. to the city it will be worth many times its cost for it will breed its species. what been lacking hitherto was a model to build toward; something to educate eye and taste; a suggester so to speak. the city is well outfitted with progressive men thinking sagacious longheaded men. the contrast between the spirit of the city and the architecture is like the contrast between waking and sleep. apparently there is a boom in everything but that one dead feature. the water in the used to be stagnant and slimy and a potent but the are flushed now two or three times a day by powerful machinery; in many of the the water never still but a steady current. other sanitary have been made; and with such effect that new orleans to be during the long between the occasional one of the in the union. theres plenty of ice now for everybody manufactured in the town. it is a driving place commercially and a great river ocean and railway business. at the date of our visit it was the best lighted city in the union electrically speaking. the new orleans electric were more numerous than those of new york and very much better. one had this modified noonday not only in canal and some neighboring chief streets but all along a stretch of five miles of river frontage. there are good in the city now several of them but recently organized and inviting pleasure at west end and spanish fort. the telephone is everywhere. one of the most notable is in journalism. the as i remember them were not a striking feature. now they are. money is spent upon them with a free hand. they get the news let it cost what it may. the editorial work is not but literature. as an example of new orleans journalistic achievement it may be that the of august contained a report of the years business of the of the mississippi valley from new orleans all the way to st. paul two thousand miles. that issue of the paper of forty seven to the page; two hundred and eighty in all; fifteen hundred words to the column; an aggregate of four hundred and twenty thousand words. that is to say not much short of three times as many words as there are in this book. one may with sorrow contrast this with the architecture of new orleans. i have been speaking of public architecture only. the domestic article in new orleans is reproachless notwithstanding it remains as it always was. all the are of wood in the american part of the town i mean and all have a comfortable look. those in the wealthy quarter are spacious; painted usually and generally have wide or supported by ornamental these stand in the center of large grounds and rise with out of the midst of swelling masses of shining green foliage and no could well be in better harmony with their surroundings or more pleasing to the eye or more homelike and one even becomes reconciled to the cistern presently; this is a mighty cask painted green and sometimes a couple of high which is against the on there is a suggestion about the combination which very incongruous at first. but the people cannot have wells and so they take rainwater. neither can they conveniently have or the israelites are buried in graves by permission i take it not requirement; but none else except the destitute who are buried at public expense. the graves are but three or four deep. the town being built upon made ground; so they do without both and few of the living complain and none of the they bury their dead in above the ground. these have a resemblance to sometimes to are built of marble generally; are architecturally graceful and shapely; they face the and of the cemetery; and when one through the midst of a thousand or so of them and their white and stretching into the distance on every hand the phrase city of the dead all at once a meaning to him. many of the are beautiful and are kept in perfect order. when one goes from the levee or the business streets near it to a cemetery he to himself that if those people down there would live as neatly while they are alive as they do after they are dead they would find many in it; and besides their quarter would be the wonder and admiration of the business world. fresh in of water are to be seen at the of many of the placed there by the pious hands of bereaved and and and renewed daily. a milder form of sorrow its inexpensive and lasting remembrancer in the coarse and ugly but indestructible immortelle which is a wreath or cross or some such emblem made of of black linen with sometimes a yellow rosette at the conjunction of the bars kind of sorrowful breastpin so to say. the immortelle no attention: you just hang it up and there you are; just leave it alone it will take care of your grief for you and keep it in mind better than you can; weather and like on sunny days pretty little of legged creep along the marble of the and catch flies. their of color as to variety are not up to the reputation. they change color when a person comes along and up an immortelle; but that is nothing: any reptile would do that. i will gradually drop this subject of i have been trying all i could to get down to the sentimental part of it but i cannot accomplish it. i think there is no genuinely sentimental part to it. it is all grotesque ghastly horrible. may have been justifiable in the bygone when nobody knew that for every dead body put into the ground to glut the earth and the and the air with five or fifty or maybe a hundred must die before their proper time; but they are hardly justifiable now when even the know that a dead saint upon a career of assassination the moment the earth over his corpse. it is a grim sort of a thought. the of st. anne up in canada have now after nineteen hundred years gone to curing the sick by the dozen. but it is that these same within a generation after st. death and burial made several thousand people sick. therefore these are simply compensation nothing more. st. anne is somewhat slow pay for a saint it is true; but better a debt paid after nineteen hundred years and outlawed by the statute of than not paid at all; and most of the of the halo do not pay at all. where you find one that like st. anne you find a hundred and fifty that take the benefit of the statute. and none of them pay any more than the principal of what they owe they pay none of the interest either simple or compound. a saint can never quite return the principal however; for his dead body people whereas his heal only they never restore the dead to life. that part of the account is always left unsettled. f. julius le after fifty years of medical practice wrote: the inhumation of human dead from infectious in constantly loading the atmosphere and polluting the waters with not only the that rise from simply putrefaction but also with the specific of the from which death the from buried will rise to the surface through eight or ten of gravel just as will do and there is practically no limit to their power of escape. during the epidemic in new orleans in e. h. barton reported that in the fourth district the mortality was four hundred and per thousand more than double that of any other. in this district were three large in which during the previous year more than three thousand had been buried. in other the proximity of to aggravate the disease. in professor bianchi demonstrated how the fearful reappearance of the plague at modena was by in ground where three hundred years previously the of the pestilence had been buried. mr. cooper in explaining the of some that the opening of the plague at in an immediate outbreak of disease. north american review no. vol. . in an address before the chicago medical society in advocacy of cremation charles w. purdy made some striking to show what a burden is laid upon society by the burial of the dead: one and times more money is annually in in the united than the government for cost this country in enough money to pay the liabilities of all the commercial in the united during the same year and give each bankrupt a capital of with which to resume business. cost annually more money than the value of the combined gold and silver yield of the united in the year ! these do not include the in and in and nor the loss from depreciation of property in the vicinity of for the rich cremation would answer as well as burial; for the connected with it could be made as costly and ostentatious as a hindu suttee; while for the poor cremation would be better than burial because so cheap footnote four or five is the minimum cost. so cheap until the poor got to the rich which they would do the adoption of cremation would relieve us of a muck of threadbare but on the other hand it would resurrect a lot of old that have had a rest for two thousand years. i have a colored acquaintance who his living by odd and heavy manual labor. he never above four hundred in a year and as he a wife and several young the closest is necessary to get him through to the end of the twelve debtless. to such a man a funeral is a colossal financial disaster. while i was writing one of the preceding this man lost a little child. he the town over with a friend trying to find a coffin that was within his means. he bought the very one he could find plain wood stained. it cost him it would have cost less than four probably if it had been built to put something useful into. he and his family will feel that outlay a good many about the same time i a man in the street whom i had not seen for six or seven years; and something like this talk i said but you used to look sad and oldish; you dont now. where did you get all this youth and bubbling cheerfulness? give me the address. he blithely took off his shining tile pointed to a notched pink circlet of paper pasted into its crown with something lettered on it and went on while i read j. b undertaker. then he clapped his hat on gave it an irreverent tilt to leeward and cried out thats whats the matter! it used to be rough times with me when you knew me business you know; mighty irregular. big fire all right brisk trade for ten days while people scared; after that dull till next fire. town like this dont have often enough a fellow so many dull in a row that he discouraged. but you bet you this is the business! people dont wait for to die. no sir they drop off right along there aint any dull spots in the undertaker line. i just in with two or three little old and a hired hearse and now look at the thing! worked up a business here that would satisfy any man dont care who he is. five years ago lodged in an attic; live in a swell house now with a mansard roof and all the modern how you talk! then with a confidential wink a dropping of the voice and an impressive laying of his hand on my arm; look here; theres one thing in this world which ever cheap. thats a coffin. theres one thing in this world which a person dont ever try to jew you down on. thats a coffin. theres one thing in this world which a person dont say ill look around a little and if i find i cant do better ill come back and take it. thats a coffin. theres one thing in this world which a person wont take in pine if he can go walnut; and wont take in walnut if he can go mahogany; and wont take in mahogany if he can go an iron casket with silver doorplate and bronze thats a coffin. and theres one thing in this world which you dont have to worry around after a person to get him to pay for. and thats a coffin. undertaking? why its the business in christendom and the why just look at it. a rich man wont have anything but your very best; and you can just pile it on too pile it on and sock it to him he wont ever holler. and you take in a poor man and if you work him right hell bust himself on a single layout. or especially a woman. fr instance: mrs. comes in widow her eyes and kind of moaning. one eye bats it around tearfully over the stock; it s a big price sure but pat shall be buried like a as he was if i have to work me off for it. ill have that wan yes madam i and it is a very good one too; not costly to be sure but in this life we must cut our garment to our clothes as the saying is. and as she out i heave in kind of casually this one with the white satin lining is a beauty but i am afraid well is a rather rather but no matter i felt obliged to say to mrs. dye mane to soy that bridget bought the mate to that box to ship that to purgatory in? then pat shall go to heaven in the twin to it if it the last rap the can raise; and you stick on some too and ill give ye another dollar. and as i with the livery of course i dont forget to mention that mrs. hired worth of and flung as much style into funeral as if he had been a duke or an assassin. and of course she in and goes the about four and an omnibus better. that used to be but thats all played now; that is in this particular town. the irish got to piling up so on their that a funeral left them ragged and hungry for two years afterward; so the priest pitched in and broke it all up. he dont allow them to have but two now and sometimes only one. well said i if you are so lighthearted and jolly in ordinary times what must you be in an epidemic? no off there. we dont like to see an epidemic. an epidemic dont pay. well of course i dont mean that exactly; but it dont pay in proportion to the regular thing. dont it occur to you why? well in ordinary times a person and we lay him up in ice; one day two days maybe three to wait for to come. a lot of it fast. we charge jewelry rates for that ice and for attendance. well dont you know when theres an epidemic they rush em to the cemetery the minute the out. no market for ice in an epidemic. same with you take a family thats able to and youve got a soft thing. you can mention sixteen different ways to do it though there aint only one or two ways when you come down to the bottom of it and theyll take the way every time. its human nature human nature in grief. it dont reason you see. time being it dont care a dam. all it is physical immortality for deceased and theyre willing to pay for it. all youve got to do is to just be cam and stack it up theyll stand the racket. why man you can take a defunct that you give away; and get your traps around you and go to work; and in a couple of hours he is worth a cool six hundred thats what worth. there aint anything equal to it but trading for in time of famine. well dont you see when theres an epidemic people dont wait to no indeed they dont; and it the business like as we say it like health see? our little joke in the trade. well i must be going. give me a call whenever you need any i mean when going by sometime. in his joyful high spirits he did the exaggerating himself if any been done. i have not enlarged on him. with the above brief to inhumation let us leave the subject. as for me i hope to be i made that remark to my pastor once who said with what he to think was an impressive manner i wouldnt worry about that if i had your much he knew about it the family all so opposed to it. the old french part of new orleans anciently the spanish part no resemblance to the american end of the city: the american end which beyond the intervening brick the are in are austerely plain and dignified; uniform of pattern with here and there a departure from it with pleasant effect; all are plastered on the outside and nearly all have long running along the several their chief beauty is the deep warm varicolored stain with which time and the weather have the plaster. it with all the surroundings and as natural a look of belonging there as the flush upon sunset this charming decoration cannot be successfully neither is it to be found elsewhere in america. the iron are a specialty also. the pattern is often exceedingly light and dainty and airy and graceful with a large cipher or monogram in the center a delicate cobweb of baffling intricate wrought in steel. the ancient are handmade and are now comparatively rare and proportionately valuable. they are become the party had the privilege of idling through this ancient quarter of new orleans with the literary genius the author of the in him the south found a masterly delineator of its interior life and its history. in truth i find by experience that the untrained eye and vacant mind can inspect it and learn of it and judge of it more clearly and profitably in his than by personal contact with it. with mr. cable along to see for you and describe and explain and illuminate a jog through that old quarter is a vivid pleasure. and you have a vivid sense as of unseen or dimly seen things vivid and yet fitful and darkling; you glimpse salient but lose the fine shades or catch them imperfectly through the vision of the imagination: a case as it were of ignorant nearsighted stranger traversing the rim of wide vague of alps with an inspired and enlightened longsighted native. we the old st. louis hotel now occupied by municipal there is nothing strikingly remarkable about it; but one can say of it as of the academy of music in new york that if a broom or a shovel ever been used in it there is no circumstantial evidence to back up the fact. it is curious that and hay and things do not grow in the academy of music; but no doubt it is on account of the interruption of the light by the and the impossibility of the crop except in the the fact that the grow their on the premises what might be done if they had the right kind of an agricultural head to the establishment. we also the venerable cathedral and the pretty square in front of it; the one dim with religious light the other brilliant with the worldly sort and lovely with and blossomy then we drove in the hot sun through the wilderness of and out on to the wide dead level beyond where the are and the water to drain the town and the commons populous with cows and passing by an old cemetery where we were told lie the ashes of an early pirate; but we took him on trust and did not visit him. he was a pirate with a tremendous and sanguinary history; and as long as he preserved unspotted in retirement the dignity of his name and the grandeur of his ancient calling homage and reverence were his from high and low; but when at last he into politics and a paltry alderman the public shook him and turned aside and wept. when he they set up a monument over him; and little by little he come into respect again; but it is respect for the pirate not the alderman. today the loyal and generous remember only what he was and charitably forget what he thence we drove a few miles across a swamp along a raised shell road with a canal on one hand and a dense wood on the other; and here and there in the distance a ragged and and cypress top standing out clear cut against the sky and as quaint of form as the in japanese such was our course and the surroundings of it. there was an occasional alligator swimming comfortably along in the canal and an occasional picturesque colored person on the bank his reflection upon the still water and watching for a bite. and we the west end a collection of of the usual light pattern with broad all around and the of the wide and blue lake lapping the we had dinner on a over the water the chief dish the renowned fish the pompano delicious as the less criminal of sin. of people come by rail and carriage to west end and to spanish fort every evening and dine listen to the take in the open air under the electric go sailing on the lake and entertain themselves in various and sundry other ways. we had on other days and in other to test the pompano. notably at an editorial dinner at one of the in the city. he was in his last possible perfection there and justified his fame. in his suite was a tall pyramid of scarlet crayfish large as large as thumb delicate palatable appetizing. also deviled whitebait; also of choice quality; and a platter of small crabs of a most superior breed. the other were what one might get at or palace; those i have spoken of can be had in similar perfection in new orleans only i suppose. in the west and south they have a new institution the broom brigade. it is composed of young ladies who dress in a uniform costume and go through the infantry drill with broom in place of musket. it is a very pretty sight on private view. when they perform on the stage of a theater in the blaze of colored it must be a fine and fascinating spectacle. i saw them go through their complex manual with grace spirit and admirable precision. i saw them do everything which a human being can possibly do with a broom except sweep. i did not see them sweep. but i know they could learn. what they have already learned that. and if they ever should learn and should go on the warpath down or some of those other streets around there those would bear a greatly improved aspect in a very few minutes. but the themselves wouldnt; so nothing would be really after all. the drill was in the washington artillery building. in this building we saw many interesting of the war. also a fine stonewall last interview with general lee. both men are on horseback. jackson just ridden up and is lee. the picture is very valuable on account of the which are authentic. but like many another historical picture it means nothing without its label. and one label will fit it as well as another it one story and a sufficient one; for it quite plainly and satisfactorily here are lee and jackson together. the artist would have made it tell that this is lee and last interview if he could have done it. but he for there wasnt any way to do it. a good legible label is usually worth for information a ton of significant attitude and expression in a historical picture. in rome people with fine sympathetic stand up and weep in front of the celebrated beatrice the day before her execution. it what a label can do. if they did not know the picture they would inspect it unmoved and say young girl with hay fever; young girl with her head in a bag. i found the southern and as pleasing to my ear as they had formerly been. a southerner talks music. at least it is music to me but then i was born in the south. the educated southerner no use for an r except at the beginning of a word. he and and and the waw and so on. the words may lack charm to the eye in print but they have it to the ear. when did the r disappear from southern speech and how did it come to disappear? the custom of dropping it was not from the north nor inherited from england. many most put a y into occasional words that begin with the k sound. for instance they say mr. carter and speak of playing or of riding in the and they have the pleasant custom long ago fallen into decay in the north of frequently the respectful sir. instead of the curt yes and the abrupt no they say yes no but there are some such as like for as and the addition of an at where it needed. i heard an educated gentleman say like the did. his cook or his butler would have said like the done. you hear say where have you been at? and here is the aggravated form heard a ragged street arab say it to a comrade: i was tom you was at. the very elect carelessly say will when they mean shall; and many of them say i didnt go to do it meaning i didnt mean to do it. the northern word guess imported from england where it used to be common and now by satirical as a yankee original is but little used among they say reckon. they havent any doesnt in their language; they say dont instead. the unpolished often use went for gone. it is nearly as bad as the northern ought. this me that a remark of a very peculiar nature was made here in my neighborhood in the north a few days ago: he ought to have went. how is that? that a good deal of a triumph? one the combined in this architecture without inquiring: one parent northern the other southern. today i heard a schoolmistress ask where is john gone? this form is so common so nearly universal in fact that if she had used whither instead of where i think it would have like an affectation. we picked up one excellent word a word worth traveling to new orleans to get; a nice limber expressive handy word lagniappe. they pronounce it it is spanish so they said. we discovered it at the head of a column of odds and in the picayune the first day; heard twenty people use it the second; what it meant the third; adopted it and got facility in swinging it the fourth. it a restricted meaning but i think the people spread it out a little when they choose. it is the equivalent of the thirteenth roll in a dozen. it is something thrown in gratis for good measure. the custom in the spanish quarter of the city. when a child or a servant something in a shop or even the mayor or the governor for aught i know he the operation by saying the shopman always the child a bit of the servant a cheap cigar or a spool of thread the governor i dont know what he the governor; support likely. when you are to drink and this does occur now and then in new orleans and you say what again? no had enough; the other party but just this one time more this is for lagniappe. when the beau that he is his compliments a trifle too high and by the young countenance that the edifice would have been better with the top compliment left off he his i beg pardon no harm intended into the form of oh thats for lagniappe. if the waiter in the restaurant and a gill of coffee down the back of your neck he for lagniappe sah and you another cup without extra charge. in the north one the war in social conversation once a month; sometimes as often as once a week; but as a distinct subject for talk it long ago been relieved of duty. there are sufficient for this. given a dinner company of six today it can easily happen that four of them and possibly five were not in the field at all. so the are four to two or five to one that the war will at no time during the evening become the topic of conversation; and the are still greater that if it become the topic it will remain so but a little while. if you add six ladies to the company you have added six people who saw so little of the dread of the war that they ran out of talk concerning them years ago and now would soon weary of the war topic if you brought it up. the case is very different in the south. there every man you meet was in the war; and every lady you meet saw the war. the war is the great chief topic of conversation. the interest in it is vivid and constant; the interest in other is fleeting. mention of the war will wake up a dull company and set their going when nearly any other topic would fail. in the south the war is what a.d. is elsewhere: they date from it. all day long you hear things placed as since the waw; or the waw; or the waw; or right the waw; or bout two or five or ten the waw or the waw. it how intimately every individual was in his own person by that tremendous episode. it the inexperienced stranger a better idea of what a vast and comprehensive calamity invasion is than he can ever get by reading at the fireside. you notice of course that we are nearly always talking about the war. it because we havent anything else to talk about but because nothing else so strong an interest for us. and there is another reason: in the war each of us in his own person to have all the different of human experience; as a consequence you cant mention an outside matter of any sort but it will certainly remind some listener of something that during the war and out he comes with it. of course that the talk back to the war. you may try all you want to to keep other before the house and we may all join in and help but there can be but one result: the most random topic would load every man up with war and shut him up too; and talk would be likely to stop presently because you cant talk pale when youve got a crimson fact or fancy in your head that you are burning to fetch out. the poet was sitting some little distance away; and presently he to speak about the moon. the gentleman who had been talking to me in an aside: there the moon is far enough from the seat of war but you will see that it will suggest something to somebody about the war; in ten minutes from now the moon as a topic will be the poet was saying he had noticed something which was a surprise to him; had had the impression that down here toward the equator the moonlight was much and than up north; had had the impression that when he new orleans many years ago the moon let me explain that. me of an anecdote. everything is changed since the war for better or for worse; but find people down here born who see no change except the change for the worse. there was an old negro woman of this sort. a young said in her presence what a wonderful moon you have down here! she and said ah bless yo heart honey you ought to seen dat moon de waw! the new topic was dead already. but the poet it and gave it a new start. a brief dispute as to whether the difference between northern and southern moonlight really or was only moonlight talk easily into talk about artificial of darkness. then somebody that when farragut advanced upon port hudson on a dark night and did not wish to assist the aim of the confederate he carried no but painted the of his white and thus a dim but valuable light which his own men to grope their way around with considerable facility. at this point the war got the floor again the ten minutes not quite up yet. i was not sorry for war talk by men who have been in a war is always interesting; whereas moon talk by a poet who not been in the moon is likely to be dull. we went to a cockpit in new orleans on a saturday afternoon. i had never seen a cockfight before. there were men and there of all and all colors and of many and but i noticed one quite conspicuous and surprising absence: the traditional brutal there were no brutal with no cockfighting going on you could have played the gathering on a stranger for a and after it for a revival provided you blindfolded your stranger for the shouting was something prodigious. a negro and a white man were in the ring; everybody else outside. the were brought in in and when time was they were taken out by the two poked toward each other and finally liberated. the big black cock instantly at the little gray one and struck him on the head with his spur. the gray with spirit. then the babel of broke out and not thenceforth. when the had been fighting some little time i was them momently to drop dead for both were blind red with blood and so exhausted that they frequently fell down. yet they would not give up neither would they die. the negro and the white man would pick them up every few wipe them off blow cold water on them in a fine spray and take their in their and hold them there a moment to warm back the perishing life perhaps; i do not know. then being set down again the dying would totter gropingly about with dragging wings find each other strike a guesswork blow or two and fall exhausted once more. i did not see the end of the battle. i forced myself to endure it as long as i could but it was too pitiful a sight; so i made frank confession to that effect and we retired. we heard afterward that the black cock in the ring and fighting to the last. evidently there is abundant fascination about this sport for such as have had a degree of familiarity with it. i never saw people enjoy anything more than this gathering this fight. the case was the same with old and with of ten. they lost themselves in of delight. the is an inhuman sort of entertainment there is no question about that; still it a much more respectable and far less cruel sport than for the like it; they experience as well as confer enjoyment; which is not the case. we assisted in the french sense at a mule race one day. i believe i this contest more than any other mule there. i it more than i remember any other animal race i ever saw. the grandstand was well filled with the beauty and the chivalry of new orleans. that phrase is not original with me. it is the southern he used it for two he it twenty times a day or twenty thousand times a day; or a million times a day according to the he is obliged to use it a million times a day if he have occasion to speak of respectable men and that often; for he no other phrase for such service except that single one. he never of it; it always a fine sound to him. there is a kind of swell medieval and tinsel about it that his gaudy barbaric soul. if he had been in palestine in the early times we should have had no to much people out of him. no he would have said the beauty and the chivalry of galilee to hear the sermon on the mount. it is likely that the men and of the south are sick enough of that phrase by this time and would like a change but there is no immediate prospect of their getting it. the new orleans editor a strong compact direct style; no words and does not gush. not so with his average correspondent. in the appendix i have a good letter by a trained hand; but the average correspondent a style which from that. for instance the sent a up one of the last april. this steamer landed at a village up there somewhere and the captain some of the ladies of the village to make a short trip with him. they accepted and came aboard and the steamboat out up the creek. that was all there was to it. and that is all that the editor of the would have got out of it. there was nothing in the thing but statistics and he would have got nothing else out of it. he would probably have even tabulated them partly to secure perfect clearness of statement and partly to save space. but his special correspondent other of handling statistics. he just off all restraint and in them on saturday early in the morning the beauty of the place our cabin and proud of her fair freight the gallant little boat up the bayou. words to say the ladies came aboard and the boat out up the creek is a clean waste of ten good words and is also destructive of compactness of statement. the trouble with the southern reporter is they unsettle him; they throw him off his balance. he is plain and sensible and satisfactory until a woman heaves in sight. then he goes all to his mind he becomes flowery and idiotic. from reading the above extract you would imagine that this student of sir walter scott is an apprentice and next to nothing about handling a pen. on the contrary he plenty of in his long letter that he well enough how to handle it when the are not around to give him the complaint. for instance at oclock ominous to gather in the southeast and presently from the gulf there came a blow which increased in severity every moment. it was not safe to leave the landing then and there was a delay. the shook off long of their mossy to the tugging of the wind and the bayou in its ambition put on miniature in mocking of much larger of water. a lull permitted a start and homewards we steamed an inky sky overhead and a heavy wind blowing. as darkness crept on there were few on board who did not wish themselves nearer home. there is nothing the matter with that. it is good description compactly put. yet there was great temptation there to drop into lurid writing. but let us return to the mule. since i left him i have around and found a full report of the race. in it i find confirmation of the theory which i broached just now namely that the trouble with the southern reporter is by walter scott and his and beauty and chivalry and so on. this is an excellent report as long as the stay out of it. but when they intrude we have this frantic result it will be probably a long time before the ladies stand such a sea of foamlike loveliness as it did yesterday. the new orleans are always charming but never so much so as at this time of the year when in their dainty spring they bring with them a breath of balmy freshness and an odor of sanctity unspeakable. the stand was so crowded with them that walking at their and seeing no possibility of approach many a man appreciated as he never did before the feeling at the gates of paradise and what was the priceless boon that would admit him to their sacred presence. sparkling on their or were the colors of their favorite and were it not for the fact that the doughty on unromantic it would have been easy to imagine one of king there were thirteen in the first heat; all of they were; all of some were handsome some were not; some were sleek some had their fur brushed lately; some were innocently gay and frisky; some were full of malice and all unrighteousness; guessing from some of them thought the matter on hand was war some thought it was a lark the rest took it for a religious occasion. and each mule according to his the result was an absence of harmony well compensated by a conspicuous presence of variety variety of a picturesque and entertaining sort. all the were young in fashionable society. if the reader been wondering why it is that the ladies of new orleans attend so humble an orgy as a the thing is now. it is a all connected with it are people of fashion. it is great fun and cordially liked. the is one of the marked occasions of the year. it brought some pretty fast to the front. one of these had to be ruled out because he was so fast that he turned the thing into a contest and it of one of its best variety. but every now and then somebody him with a new name and a new complexion and rings him in again. the dress in full jockey of silks and the thirteen got away in a body after a couple of false and off with prodigious spirit. as each mule and each rider had a distinct opinion of his own as to how the race ought to be run and which side of the track was best in certain circumstances and how often the track ought to be crossed and when a collision ought to be accomplished and when it ought to be these conflicting a most fantastic and picturesque confusion and the resulting spectacle was killingly comical. mile heat; time eight of the thirteen i had a bet on a mule which would have won if the procession had been reversed. the second heat was good fun; and so was the consolation race for beaten which later; but the first heat was the best in that respect. i think that much the most enjoyable of all is a steamboat race; but next to that i prefer the gay and joyous two raging along straining every nerve that is to say every rivet in the quaking and shaking and groaning from stem to stern spouting white steam from the pouring black smoke from the raining down sparks parting the river into long of hissing foam this is sport that a very liver curl with enjoyment. a is pretty tame and colorless in comparison. still a might be well enough in its way perhaps if it were not for the tiresome false but then nobody is ever at least nobody was ever when i was at a they have been crippled it is true; but this is little to the purpose. the annual event in new orleans is a something which we too late to sample the i saw the procession of the mystic crew of comus there years ago with and and so on clothed in silken and golden planned and bought for that single nights use; and in their train all manner of and other diverting grotesquerie a startling and wonderful sort of show as it solemnly and silently down the street in the light of its smoking and flickering but it is said that in these latter days the spectacle is mightily augmented as to cost splendor and variety. there is a chief personage rex; and if i remember rightly neither this king nor any of his great following of is known to any outsider. all these people are of position and consequence; and it is a proud thing to belong to the organization; so the mystery in which they hide their personality is merely for sake and not on account of the police. is of course a relic of the french and spanish occupation; but i judge that the religious feature been pretty well out of it now. sir walter got the advantage of the of the cowl and rosary and he will stay. his medieval business by the and the and the pleasant from fairyland is finer to look at than the poor fantastic and of the rabble of the day and quite as well perhaps to emphasize the day and admonish men that the between the worldly season and the holy one is this pageant was the exclusive possession of new orleans until recently. but now it spread to memphis and st. louis and baltimore. it probably its limit. it is a thing which could hardly exist in the practical north; would certainly last but a very brief time; as brief a time as it would last in london. for the soul of it is the romantic not the funny and the grotesque. take away the romantic the and and and would die down there in the south. the very feature that it alive in the south romance would kill it in the north or in london. puck and punch and the press universal would fall upon it and make merciless fun of it and its first exhibition would be also its last. against the of the french revolution and of bonaparte may be set two compensating the revolution broke the chains of the regime and of the church and made of a nation of abject a nation of and bonaparte the setting of merit above birth and also so completely stripped the divinity from royalty that whereas crowned in europe were before they are only men since and can never be again but only and answerable for their acts like common clay. such as these compensate the temporary harm which bonaparte and the revolution did and leave the world in debt to them for these great and permanent services to liberty humanity and progress. then comes sir walter scott with his and by his single might this wave of progress and even turns it back; the world in love with and with decayed and swinish of religion; with decayed and degraded of government; with the and sham sham and sham of a brainless and worthless society. he did measureless harm; more real and lasting harm perhaps than any other individual that ever wrote. most of the world now good part of these though by no means all of them; but in our south they flourish pretty forcefully still. not so forcefully as half a generation ago perhaps but still forcefully. there the genuine and wholesome civilization of the nineteenth century is curiously confused and with the walter scott sham civilization; and so you have practical commonsense progressive and progressive works; mixed up with the duel the inflated speech and the jejune romanticism of an absurd past that is dead and out of charity ought to be buried. but for the sir walter disease the character of the southerner or southron according to sir way of phrasing it would be wholly modern in place of modern and medieval mixed and the south would be fully a generation further advanced than it is. it was sir walter that made every gentleman in the south a major or a colonel or a general or a judge before the war; and it was he also that made these value these bogus for it was he that rank and caste down there and also reverence for rank and caste and pride and pleasure in them. enough is laid on slavery without upon it these and of sir walter. sir walter had so large a hand in making southern character as it before the war that he is in great measure responsible for the war. it a little harsh toward a dead man to say that we never should have had any war but for sir walter; and yet something of a plausible argument might perhaps be made in support of that wild proposition. the southerner of the american revolution owned so did the southerner of the civil war: but the former the latter as an englishman a frenchman. the change of character can be rather more easily to sir influence than to that of any other thing or person. one may observe by one or two how deeply that influence and how strongly it if one take up a northern or southern literary periodical of forty or fifty years ago he will find it filled with wordy windy flowery eloquence romanticism sentimentality all from sir walter and sufficiently badly done too innocent of his style and in fact. this sort of literature being the fashion in both of the country there was opportunity for the competition; and as a consequence the south was able to show as many literary names proportioned to population as the north could. but a change come and there is no opportunity now for a fair competition between north and south. for the north thrown out that old inflated style whereas the southern writer still to it to it and a restricted market for his as a consequence. there is as much literary talent in the south now as ever there was of course; but its work can gain but slight currency under present conditions; the write for the past not the present; they use obsolete and a dead language. but when a southerner of genius modern english his book goes upon no longer but upon wings; and they carry it swiftly all about america and england and through the great english reprint publishing of germany as witness the experience of mr. cable and uncle remus two of the very few southern who do not write in the southern style. instead of three or four literary names the south ought to have a dozen or two and will have them when sir time is out. a curious exemplification of the power of a single book for good or harm is shown in the effects wrought by don quixote and those wrought by the first swept the admiration for the medieval out of existence; and the other it. as far as our south is concerned the good work done by cervantes is pretty nearly a dead letter so effectually pernicious work it. mr. joel chandler harris uncle remus was to arrive from atlanta at seven oclock sunday morning; so we got up and received him. we were able to detect him among the crowd of at the by his correspondence with a description of him which had been furnished us from a trustworthy source. he was said to be undersized and somewhat freckled. he was the only man in the party whose outside with this bill of he was said to be very shy. he is a shy man. of this there is no doubt. it may not show on the surface but the shyness is there. after days of intimacy one to see that it is still in about as strong force as ever. there is a fine and beautiful nature hidden behind it as all know who have read the uncle remus book; and a fine genius too as all know by the same sign. i seem to be talking quite freely about this neighbor; but in talking to the public i am but talking to his personal and these things are permissible among he deeply disappointed a number of who had eagerly to mr. house to get a glimpse of the illustrious sage and oracle of the they said they were grieved about it. so to console them the book was brought that they might hear uncle story from the of uncle remus himself or what in their outraged eyes was left of him. but it turned out that he had never read aloud to people and was too shy to venture the attempt now. mr. cable and i read from of ours to show him what an easy trick it was; but his immortal shyness was proof against even this sagacious strategy so we had to read about rabbit ourselves. mr. harris ought to be able to read the negro dialect better than anybody else for in the matter of writing it he is the only master the country produced. mr. cable is the only master in the writing of french that the country produced; and he them in perfection. it was a great treat to hear him read about and about and his famous to the union along with of german dialect from a novel which was still in manuscript. it came out in conversation that in two different mr. cable got into grotesque trouble by using in his french names which nevertheless to be borne by living and sensitive of new orleans. his names were either or were from the ancient and obsolete past i do not now remember which; but at any rate living of them turned up and were a good deal hurt at attention directed to themselves and their affairs in so excessively public a manner. mr. warner and i had an experience of the same sort when we wrote the book the gilded age. there is a character in it sellers. i do not remember what his first name was in the beginning; but anyway mr. warner did not like it and wanted it improved. he me if i was able to imagine a person sellers. of course i said i could not without he said that away out west once he had met and and actually shaken hands with a man bearing that impossible name sellers. he added it was twenty years ago; his name probably carried him off before this; and if it he will never see the book anyhow. we will confiscate his name. the name you are using is common and therefore dangerous; there are probably a thousand bearing it and the whole horde will come after us; but sellers is a safe name it is a rock. so we that name; and when the book had been out about a week one of the and and most aristocratic looking white men that ever lived around with the most formidable libel suit in his pocket that ever well in brief we got his permission to suppress an edition of ten million footnote taken from memory and probably incorrect. think it was more. of the book and change that name to mulberry sellers in future one day on the street i the man whom of all men i most wished to see horace formerly pilot under me or rather over me now captain of the great steamer city of baton rouge the latest and addition to the anchor line. the same slender figure the same tight the same springy step the same alertness the same decision of eye and answering decision of hand the same erect military bearing; not an inch or lost in girth not an ounce or lost in weight not a hair turned. it is a curious thing to leave a man years old and come back at the end of years and find him still only i have not had an experience of this kind before i believe. there were some but they for next to nothing since they were inconspicuous. his boat was just in. i had been waiting several days for her to return to st. louis in her. the captain and i joined a party of ladies and of major wood and went down the river miles in a swift tug to sugar plantation. strung along below the city were a number of decayed ramshackly superannuated old not one of which had i ever seen before. they had all been built and worn out and thrown aside since i was here last. this one a realizing sense of the frailness of a mississippi boat and the briefness of its life. six miles below town a fat and battered brick chimney sticking above the and was pointed out as the monument by an appreciative nation to celebrate the battle of new orleans victory over the british january . the war had ended the two were at peace but the news had not yet new orleans. if we had had the cable telegraph in those days this blood would not have been spilt those would not have been wasted; and better still jackson would probably never have been president. we have gotten over the done us by the war of but not over some of those done us by presidency. the warmouth plantation a vast deal of ground and the hospitality of the warmouth mansion is graduated to the same large scale. we saw at work here for the first time. the traction engine about on its own till it the required spot; then it still and by means of a wire rope the huge plow toward itself two or three hundred across the field between the of cane. the thing down into the black mold a foot and a half deep. the plow like a brace of a hudson river steamer inverted. when the negro steersman on one end of it that end down near the ground while the other sticks up high in air. this great seesaw goes rolling and pitching like a ship at sea and it is not every circus rider that could stay on it. the plantation two thousand six hundred acres; six hundred and fifty are in cane; and there is a fruitful orange grove of five thousand the cane is cultivated after a modern and intricate scientific fashion too elaborate and complex for me to attempt to describe; but it lost last year. i forget the other details. however this years crop will reach ten or twelve hundred tons of sugar consequently last years loss will not matter. these troublesome and expensive scientific achieve a yield of a ton and a half and from that to two tons to the acre; which is three or four times what the yield of an acre was in my time. the were everywhere alive with little crabs one saw them sidewise in every direction whenever they heard a disturbing noise. expensive these crabs; for they bore into the and ruin them. the great sugarhouse was a wilderness of and and and and machinery. the process of making sugar is exceedingly interesting. first you heave your cane into the and grind out the juice; then run it through the pan to extract the fiber; then through the to remove the alcohol; then through the clarifying to discharge the molasses; then through the pipe to condense it; then through the vacuum pan to extract the vacuum. it is now ready for market. i have these down from memory. the thing simple and easy. do not deceive yourself. to make sugar is really one of the most difficult things in the world. and to make it right is next to impossible. if you will examine your own supply every now and then for a term of years and tabulate the result you will find that not two men in twenty can make sugar without getting sand into it. we could have gone down to the mouth of the river and captain great work the where the river been compressed between and thus to but it was useless to go since at this stage of the water everything would be covered up and invisible. we could have that ancient and singular burg which on in the water so they say; where nearly all communication is by skiff and canoe even to the attending of and and where the and are as handy with the oar as are with the velocipede. we could have done a number of other things; but on account of limited time we went back home. the sail up the breezy and sparkling river was a charming experience and would have been satisfyingly sentimental and romantic but for the of the pet parrot whose tireless upon the scenery and the were always and often profane. he had also a superabundance of the discordant earsplitting metallic laugh common to his breed a laugh a frankenstein laugh with the soul left out of it. he applied it to every sentimental remark and to every pathetic song. he it out with hideous energy after home again home again from a foreign shore and said he wouldnt give a damn for a of such rot. romance and sentiment cannot long survive this sort of discouragement; so the singing and talking presently which so delighted the parrot that he cursed himself hoarse for joy. then the male of the party moved to the forecastle to smoke and gossip. there were several old along and i learned from them a great deal of what had been happening to my former river during my long absence. i learned that a pilot whom i used to steer for is become a spiritualist and for more than fifteen years been a letter every week from a deceased relative through a new york spiritualist medium manchester postage graduated by distance: from the local in paradise to new york five from new york to st. louis three i remember mr. manchester very well. i on him once ten years ago with a couple of one of whom wished to inquire after a deceased uncle. this uncle had lost his life in a peculiarly violent and unusual way half a dozen years before: a cyclone him some three miles and a tree down with him which was four through at the butt and high. he did not survive this triumph. at the seance just to my friend his late uncle through mr. manchester and the late uncle wrote down his using mr. hand and pencil for that purpose. the following is a fair example of the and also of the sloppy twaddle in the way of furnished by manchester under the pretense that it came from the specter. if this man is not the fraud that i owe him an apology a. about how happy we are; and about left behind in the earth and how to influence them for their good. q. when your in the earth all get to the spirit land what shall you have to talk about then? nothing but about how happy you all are? no reply. it is that spirits will not answer frivolous q. how is it that spirits that are content to spend an eternity in frivolous and accept it as happiness are so fastidious about frivolous upon the subject? q. you know my present way of life. can you suggest any to it in the way of crime that will reasonably insure my going to some other place. q. very well then when did you pass away? how long have you been in the spirit land? q. though you may be indifferent and uncertain as to and times in your present condition and environment this nothing to do with your former condition. you had then. one of these is what i ask for. you departed on a certain day in a certain year. is not this true? much fumbling with pencil on the part of the medium accompanied by violent spasmodic of his head and body for some little time. finally explanation to the effect that spirits often forget such things being without importance to them. q. then this one actually forgotten the date of its translation to the spirit land? more fumbling jerking idiotic on the part of the medium. finally explanation to the effect that the spirit forgotten the year. q. this is indeed stupendous. let me put one more question one last question to you before we part to meet no more; for even if i fail to avoid your asylum a meeting there will go for nothing as a meeting since by that time you will easily have forgotten me and my name: did you die a natural death or were you cut off by a catastrophe? this ended the interview. my friend told the medium that when his relative was in this poor world he was endowed with an extraordinary intellect and an absolutely defectless memory and it a great pity that he had not been to keep some shred of these for his amusement in the of everlasting contentment and for the amazement and admiration of the rest of the population there. this man had plenty of plenty yet. he letters from spirits located in every part of the spirit world and them all over this country through the united mail. these letters are filled with advice advice from spirits who dont know as much as a tadpole and this advice is religiously by the one of these was a man whom the spirits if one may thus plurally describe the ingenious manchester were teaching how to contrive an improved railway it is coarse employment for a spirit but it is higher and activity than talking for ever about how happy we are. in the course of the tugboat gossip it came out that out of every five of my former who had quitted the river four had chosen farming as an occupation. of course this was not because they were peculiarly gifted agriculturally and thus more likely to succeed as than in other the reason for their choice must be to some other source. doubtless they chose farming because that life is private and secluded from of undesirable like the pilothouse hermitage. and doubtless they also chose it because on a thousand nights of black storm and danger they had noted the twinkling of solitary as the boat swung by and pictured to themselves the serenity and security and coziness of such at such times and so had come to dream of that retired and peaceful life as the one desirable thing to long for anticipate earn and at last enjoy. but i did not learn that any of these had astonished anybody with their their do not support them: they support their the from the river annually about the breaking of spring and is seen no more till next frost. then he again in damaged homespun the hayseed out of his hair and a pilothouse berth for the winter. in this way he the which his farming during the agricultural season. so his river bondage is but half broken; he is still the slave the half of the year. one of these men bought a farm but did not retire to it. he knew a trick worth two of that. he did not propose to pauperize his farm by his personal ignorance to working it. no he put the farm into the hands of an agricultural expert to be worked on out of every three loads of corn the expert to have two and the pilot the third. but at the end of the season the pilot received no corn. the expert that his share was not the farm produced only two loads. some of the whom i had known had had the outcome fortunate sometimes but not in all captain montgomery whom i had for when he was a pilot the confederate fleet in the great battle before memphis; when his vessel went down he swam ashore fought his way through a squad of and made a gallant and narrow escape. he was always a cool man; nothing could disturb his serenity. once when he was captain of the crescent city i was bringing the boat into port at new orleans and momently from the hurricane deck but received none. i had stopped the and there my authority and responsibility it was evening dim twilight the hat was upon the big bell and i supposed the intellectual end of the captain was in it but such was not the case. the captain was very strict; therefore i knew better than to touch a bell without my duty was to hold the boat steadily on her calamitous course and leave the to take care of themselves which i did. so we went plowing past the of and getting closer and closer the crash was bound to come very soon and still that hat never for alas the captain was napping in the texas.... things were becoming exceedingly nervous and uncomfortable. it to me that the captain was not going to appear in time to see the entertainment. but he did. just as we were walking into the stern of a steamboat he stepped out on deck and said with heavenly serenity set her back on both which i did; but a trifle late however for the next moment we went smashing through that other flimsy outer works with a most prodigious racket. the captain never said a word to me about the matter afterwards except to remark that i had done right and that he hoped i would not hesitate to act in the same way again in like circumstances. one of the whom i had known when i was on the river had a very honorable death. his boat caught fire and he at the wheel until he got her safe to land. then he went out over the with his clothing in and was the last person to get ashore. he from his in the course of two or three hours and his was the only life lost. the history of mississippi piloting six or seven of this sort of martyrdom and half a hundred of from a like fate which came within a second or two of being fatally too late; but there is no instance of a pilot his post to save his life while by remaining and sacrificing it he might secure other from destruction. it is well worth while to set down this noble fact and well worth while to put it in italics too. the cub pilot is early to despise all connected with a calling and to prefer any sort of death to the deep dishonor of his post while there is any possibility of his being useful in it. and so effectively are these that even young and but can be upon to stick to the wheel and die there when occasion in a memphis graveyard is buried a young fellow who perished at the wheel a great many years ago in white river to save the of other men. he said to the captain that if the fire would give him time to reach a sand bar some distance away all could be saved but that to land against the bluff bank of the river would be to insure the loss of many he the bar and grounded the boat in shallow water; but by that time the had closed around him and in through them he was fatally burned. he had been to fly sooner but had as a pilot to reply i will not go. if i go nobody will be saved; if i stay no one will be lost but me. i will stay. there were two hundred on board and no life was lost but the there used to be a monument to this young fellow in that memphis graveyard. while we in memphis on our down trip i out to look for it but our time was so brief that i was obliged to turn back before my object was accomplished. the tugboat gossip informed me that dick was dead blown up near memphis and that several whom i had known had fallen in the war one or two of them shot down at the wheel; that another and very particular friend whom i had many for had stepped out of his house in new orleans one night years ago to collect some money in a remote part of the city and had never been seen again was murdered and thrown into the river it was thought; that ben was dead long ago; also his wild cub whom i used to quarrel with all through every daylight watch. a heedless reckless creature he was and always in hot water always in mischief. an arkansas passenger brought an enormous bear aboard one day and chained him to a lifeboat on the hurricane deck. cub could not rest till he had gone there and unchained the bear to see what he would do. he was promptly gratified. the bear chased him around and around the deck for miles and miles with two hundred eager grinning through the for audience and finally snatched off the coattail and went into the texas to chew it. the turned out with alacrity and left the bear in sole possession. he presently grew lonesome and out for recreation. he ranged the whole boat every part of it with an advance guard of people in front of him and a voiceless vacancy behind him; and when his owner him at last those two were the only visible anywhere; everybody else was in hiding and the boat was a solitude. i was told that one of my pilot fell dead at the wheel from heart disease in . the captain was on the roof at the time. he saw the boat breaking for the shore; shouted and got no answer; ran up and found the pilot lying dead on the floor. mr. had been blown up in madrid bend; was not injured but the other pilot was lost. george had been blown up near memphis blown into the river from the wheel and disabled. the water was very cold; he clung to a cotton bale mainly with his teeth and until nearly exhausted when he was rescued by some deck hands who were on a piece of the wreck. they tore open the bale and packed him in the cotton and warmed the life back into him and got him safe to memphis. he is one of on the baton rouge now. into the life of a steamboat clerk now dead had a bit of romance somewhat grotesque romance but romance nevertheless. when i knew him he was a shiftless young spendthrift boisterous goodhearted full of careless and pretty conspicuously promising to fool his away early and come to nothing. in a western city lived a rich and childless old foreigner and his wife; and in their family was a comely young girl sort of friend sort of servant. the young clerk of whom i have been speaking whose name was not george johnson but who shall be george johnson for the of this narrative got acquainted with this young girl and they and the old foreigner found them out and them. being ashamed they lied and said they were married; that they had been privately married. then the old hurt was healed and he and blessed them. after that they were able to continue their sin without concealment. the wife and presently he after her. of the family to mourn; and among the sat the two young the will was opened and solemnly read. it every penny of that old mans great wealth to mrs. george johnson! and there was no such person. the young fled forth then and did a very foolish thing: married themselves before an obscure justice of the peace and got him to antedate the thing. that did no sort of good. the distant in and exposed the fraudful date with extreme suddenness and surprising ease and carried off the fortune leaving the very legitimately and legally and irrevocably chained together in honorable marriage but with not so much as a penny to bless themselves withal. such are the actual and not all have for a base so telling a situation. we had some talk about captain isaiah sellers now many years dead. he was a fine man a man and greatly respected both ashore and on the river. he was very tall well built and handsome; and in his old age as i remember him his hair was as black as an and his eye and hand were as strong and steady and his nerve and judgment as firm and clear as young or old among the fraternity of he was the patriarch of the craft; he had been a keelboat pilot before the day of and a steamboat pilot before any other steamboat pilot still surviving at the time i speak of had ever turned a wheel. consequently his brethren held him in the sort of awe in which illustrious of a bygone age are always held by their he knew how he was and perhaps this fact added some trifle of stiffening to his natural dignity which had been sufficiently stiff in its original state. he left a diary behind him; but apparently it did not date back to his first steamboat trip which was said to be the year the first steamboat disturbed the waters of the mississippi. at the time of his death a correspondent of the st. louis republican the following from the diary in february he shipped on board the steamer rambler at florence ala. and made during that year three to new orleans and back this on the gen. between nashville and new orleans. it was during his stay on this boat that captain sellers the tap of the bell as a signal to heave the lead previous to which time it was the custom for the pilot to speak to the men below when were wanted. the proximity of the forecastle to the pilothouse no doubt this an easy matter; but how different on one of our of the present day. in we find him on board the president a boat of two hundred and tons burden and plying between and new orleans. thence he joined the jubilee in and on this boat he did his first piloting in the st. louis trade; his first watch extending from herculaneum to st. genevieve. on may he completed and left pittsburgh in charge of the steamer prairie a boat of four hundred tons and the first steamer with a stateroom cabin ever seen at st. louis. in he the signal for meeting and which with some slight change been the universal custom of this day; in fact is obligatory by act of congress. as general of river history we quote the following marginal from his general log in march gen. lafayette left new orleans for st. louis on the steamer natchez. in january left the new orleans wharf to celebrate the occasion of gen. visit to that city. in the north american made the run from new orleans to memphis in six days best time on record to that date. it since been made in two days and ten hours. in steamer hudson made the run from white river to helena a distance of miles in twelve hours. this was the source of much talk and speculation among directly interested. up to the present time a term of years we ascertain by reference to the diary he made four hundred and sixty round to new orleans which a distance of one million one hundred and four thousand miles or an average of miles a day. whenever captain sellers a body of gossiping a chill fell there and talking for this reason: whenever six were gathered together there would always be one or two newly fledged in the lot and the elder would be always showing off before these poor making them sorrowfully feel how callow they were how recent their nobility and how humble their degree by talking largely and vaporously of on the river; always making it a point to date everything back as far as they could so as to make the new men feel their newness to the degree possible and envy the old in the like degree. and how these complacent would swell and brag and lie and date back ten fifteen twenty years and how they did enjoy the effect produced upon the and envying and perhaps just at this happy stage of the proceedings the stately figure of captain isaiah sellers that real and only genuine son of antiquity would drift solemnly into the midst. imagine the size of the silence that would result on the instant. and imagine the feelings of those and the exultation of their recent audience when the ancient captain would begin to drop casual and indifferent of a reminiscent nature about that had and that had been made a generation before the baldhead in the company had ever set his foot in a pilothouse! many and many a time did this ancient mariner appear on the scene in the above fashion and spread disaster and humiliation around him. if one might believe the he always dated his back to the misty dawn of river history; and he never used the same island twice; and never did he employ an island that still or give one a name which anybody present was old enough to have heard of before. if you might believe the he was always conscientiously particular about little details; never spoke of the state of mississippi for instance no he would say when the state of mississippi was where arkansas now is and would never speak of louisiana or missouri in a general way and leave an incorrect impression on your mind no he would say when louisiana was up the river farther or when missouri was on the illinois side. the old gentleman was not of literary turn or capacity but he used to jot down brief of plain practical information about the river and sign them mark twain and give them to the new orleans picayune. they related to the stage and condition of the river and were accurate and valuable; and thus far they contained no poison. but in speaking of the stage of the river today at a given point the captain was pretty apt to drop in a little remark about this being the first time he had seen the water so high or so low at that particular point for years; and now and then he would mention island and follow it in parentheses with some such observation as in if i remember rightly. in these antique lay poison and bitterness for the other old and they used to chaff the mark twain with unsparing mockery. it so that one of these footnote the original ms. of it in the own hand been sent to me from new orleans. it as my opinion for the benefit of the of new orleans: the water is higher this far up than it been since . my opinion is that the water will be deep in canal street before the first of next june. mrs. plantation at the head of big black island is all under water and it not been since . the text for my first newspaper article. i it broadly very broadly stringing my out to the extent of eight hundred or a thousand words. i was a cub at the time. i my performance to some and they eagerly rushed it into print in the new orleans true delta. it was a great pity; for it did nobody any worthy service and it sent a pang deep into a good mans heart. there was no malice in my rubbish; but it at the captain. it at a man to whom such a thing was new and strange and dreadful. i did not know then though i do now that there is no suffering comparable with that which a private person when he is for the first time in print. captain sellers did me the honor to profoundly detest me from that day forth. when i say he did me the honor i am not using empty words. it was a very real honor to be in the of so great a man as captain sellers and i had wit enough to appreciate it and be proud of it. it was distinction to be loved by such a man; but it was a much greater distinction to be hated by him because he loved scores of people; but he didnt sit up nights to hate anybody but me. he never printed another paragraph while he lived and he never again signed mark twain to anything. at the time that the telegraph brought the news of his death i was on the pacific coast. i was a fresh new journalist and needed a de so i the ancient discarded one and have done my best to make it remain what it was in his hands a sign and symbol and warrant that whatever is found in its company may be on as being the petrified truth; how i have it would not be modest in me to say. the captain had an honorable pride in his profession and an abiding love for it. he ordered his monument before he and kept it near him until he did die. it over his grave now in cemetery st. louis. it is his image in marble standing on duty at the pilot wheel; and worthy to stand and confront criticism for it a man who in life would have stayed there till he burned to a cinder if duty required it. the thing we saw on our whole mississippi trip we saw as we new orleans in the this was the curving frontage of the crescent city lit up with the white glare of five miles of electric it was a wonderful sight and very beautiful. we left for st. louis in the city of baton rouge on a delightfully hot day but with the main purpose of my visit but lamely accomplished. i had hoped to hunt up and talk with a hundred but got so pleasantly involved in the social life of the town that i got nothing more than mere talks with a couple of dozen of the craft. i was on the bench of the pilothouse when we backed out and up for the start the boat for a good ready in the way and the black smoke piling out of the equally in the way. then we to gather momentum and presently were fairly under way and booming along. it was all as natural and familiar and so were the shoreward sights as if there had been no break in my river life. there was a cub and i that he would take the wheel now; and he did. captain stepped into the pilothouse. presently the cub closed up on the rank of he made me nervous for he too much water to show between our boat and the i knew quite well what was going to happen because i could date back in my own life and inspect the record. the captain on during a silent then took the wheel himself and crowded the boat in till she went scraping along within a handbreadth of the it was exactly the favor which he had done me about a quarter of a century before in that same spot the first time i ever steamed out of the port of new orleans. it was a very great and sincere pleasure to me to see the thing repeated with somebody else as victim. we made natchez three hundred miles in hours and a half much the passage i have ever made over that piece of water. the next morning i came on with the four oclock watch and saw successfully run half a dozen in a fog using for his guidance the marked chart and patented by and himself. this sufficiently evidenced the great value of the chart. by and by when the fog to clear off i noticed that the reflection of a tree in the smooth water of an bank six hundred away was and blacker than the ghostly tree itself. the faint spectral dimly through the shredding fog were very pretty things to see. we had a heavy thunderstorm at natchez another at vicksburg and still another about fifty miles below memphis. they had an energy which had long been unfamiliar to me. this third storm was accompanied by a raging wind. we tied up to the bank when we saw the tempest coming and everybody left the pilothouse but me. the wind bent the young down the pale underside of the leaves; and gust after gust in quick succession thrashing the violently up and down and to this side and that and swift of alternating green and white according to the side of the leaf that was exposed and these after each other as do their kind over a field of no color that was visible anywhere was quite natural all were charged with a leaden tinge from the solid overhead. the river was leaden; all the same; and even the of combing were dully shaded by the dark rich atmosphere through which their swarming the were constant and deafening; explosion explosion with but inconsequential between and the grew steadily sharper and and more trying to the ear; the lightning was as diligent as the thunder and produced effects which enchanted the eye and sent electric of mixed delight and apprehension shivering along every nerve in the body in unintermittent procession. the rain down in amazing volume; the earsplitting broke nearer and nearer; the wind increased in fury and to wrench off and and send them sailing away through space; the pilothouse fell to rocking and straining and cracking and surging and i went down in the hold to see what time it was. people boast a good deal about alpine but the which i have had the luck to see in the alps were not the of some which i have seen in the mississippi valley. i may not have seen the alps do their best of course and if they can beat the mississippi i dont wish to. on this up trip i saw a little towhead infant island half a mile long which had been formed during the past nineteen years. since there was so much time to spare that nineteen years of it could be devoted to the construction of a mere towhead where was the use originally in rushing this whole globe through in six days? it is likely that if more time had been taken in the first place the world would have been made right and this ceaseless improving and would not be necessary now. but if you hurry a world or a house you are nearly sure to find out by and by that you have left out a towhead or a or some other little convenience here and there which got to be no matter how much expense and vexation it may cost. we had a succession of black nights going up the river and it was observable that whenever we landed and suddenly inundated the with the intense sunburst of the electric light a certain curious effect was always produced: of instantly out from the masses of shining green foliage and went careering hither and thither through the white and often a songbird tuned up and fell to singing. we that they mistook this superb artificial day for the genuine article. we had a delightful trip in that thoroughly steamer and that it was accomplished so speedily. by means of diligence and activity we to hunt out nearly all the old one was missing however; he went to his reward whatever it was two years ago. but i found out all about him. his case me to realize how lasting can be the effect of a very trifling occurrence. when he was an in our village and i a schoolboy a couple of young came to the town and a while; and one day they got themselves up in cheap royal finery and did the richard iii with maniac energy and prodigious powwow in the presence of the village this blacksmith cub was there and the histrionic poison his bones. this vast lumbering ignorant lout was and irrecoverably. he and presently turned up in st. louis. i ran across him there by and by. he was standing musing on a street corner with his left hand on his hip the thumb of his right supporting his chin face bowed and frowning slouch hat down over his forehead himself to be othello or some such character and that the passing crowd marked his tragic bearing and were awestruck. i joined him and tried to get him down out of the but did not succeed. however he casually informed me presently that he was a member of the walnut street theater company and he tried to say it with indifference but the indifference was thin and a mighty exultation through it. he said he was cast for a part in julius caesar for that night and if i should come i would see him. if i should come! i said i wouldnt miss it if i were dead. i went away stupefied with astonishment and saying to myself how strange it is! we always thought this fellow a fool; yet the moment he comes to a great city where intelligence and appreciation abound the talent concealed in this shabby napkin is at once discovered and promptly and honored. but i came away from the theater that night disappointed and offended; for i had had no glimpse of my hero and his name was not in the i met him on the street the next morning and before i could speak he why didnt you see them roman that stood back there in a rank and sometimes in procession around the stage? do you mean the roman army? those six sandaled in with tin and that around treading on each in charge of a consumptive dressed like themselves? thats it! thats it! i was one of them roman i was the next to the last one. a half a year ago i used to always be the last one; but been well they told me that that poor fellow a roman soldier to the last a matter of years. sometimes they cast him for a speaking part but not an elaborate one. he could be trusted to go and say my lord the carriage but if they to add a sentence or two to this his memory felt the strain and he was likely to miss fire. yet poor devil he had been patiently studying the part of hamlet for more than thirty years and he lived and in the belief that some day he would be to play it! and this is what came of that fleeting visit of those young to our village such and ago! what noble horseshoes this man might have made but for those and what an inadequate roman soldier he did make! a day or two after we st. louis i was walking along fourth street when a man gave a sort of start as he me then stopped came back me narrowly with a clouding brow and finally said with deep asperity a maniac i at first. but all in a flash i recognized him. i made an effort to blush that strained every muscle in me and as sweetly and winningly as ever i knew how been a little slow but am just this minute closing in on the place where they keep it. come in and help. he softened and said make it a bottle of champagne and he was agreeable. he said he had seen my name in the papers and had put all his affairs aside and turned out resolved to find me or die; and make me answer that question satisfactorily or kill me; though the most of his late asperity had been rather counterfeit than otherwise. this meeting brought back to me the st. louis of about thirty years ago. i spent a week there at that time in a boardinghouse and had this young fellow for a neighbor across the hall. we saw some of the and and by and by we went one night to an armory where two hundred young men had met upon call to be armed and go forth against the under command of a military man. we drilled till about ten oclock at night; then news came that the mob were in great force in the lower end of the town and were sweeping everything before them. our column moved at once. it was a very hot night and my musket was very heavy. we and and the nearer we the seat of war the hotter i grew and the i got. i was behind my friend; so finally i him to hold my musket while i out and got a drink. then i branched off and went home. i was not feeling any solicitude about him of course because i knew he was so well armed now that he could take care of himself without any trouble. if i had had any about that i would have another musket for him. i left the city pretty early the next morning and if this grizzled man had not to encounter my name in the papers the other day in st. louis and felt moved to seek me out i should have carried to my grave a uncertainty as to whether he ever got out of the all right or not. i ought to have thirty years ago; i know that. and i would have if i had had the but in the circumstances he better fixed to conduct the than i was. one monday near the time of our visit to st. louis the came out with a couple of of sunday statistics whereby it that st. louis people attended the morning and evening church services the day before and attended thus out of the total of population respected the day i found these statistics in a condensed form in a telegram of the associated press and preserved them. they made it apparent that st. louis was in a higher state of grace than she could have to be in my time. but now that i canvass the narrowly i suspect that the telegraph mutilated them. it cannot be that there are more than in the town; the other must be classified as out of these according to this questionable telegram only attended church and while out of the went to church and all at once the thought came into my mind i have not sought out mr. brown. upon that text i desire to depart from the direct line of my subject and make a little excursion. i wish to reveal a secret which i have carried with me nine years and which become burdensome. upon a certain occasion nine years ago i had said with strong feeling if ever i see st. louis again i will seek out mr. brown the great grain merchant and ask of him the privilege of shaking him by the hand. the occasion and the circumstances were as a friend of mine a clergyman came one evening and said i have a most remarkable letter here which i want to read to you if i can do it without breaking down. i must preface it with some however. the letter is written by an and of the lowest origin and rearing a man all stained with crime and in ignorance; but thank god with a mine of pure gold hidden away in him as you shall see. his letter is written to a burglar williams who is serving a term in a certain state prison for burglary. williams was a particularly daring burglar and plied that trade during a number of years; but he was caught at last and jailed to await trial in a town where he had broken into a house at night pistol in hand and forced the owner to hand over to him in government williams was not a common sort of person by any means; he was a graduate of harvard college and came of good new england stock. his father was a clergyman. while lying in jail his health to fail and he was threatened with consumption. this fact together with the opportunity for reflection by solitary confinement had its effect its natural effect. he fell into serious thought; his early training asserted itself with power and wrought with strong influence upon his mind and heart. he put his old life behind him and an earnest christian. some ladies in the town heard of this him and by their encouraging words supported him in his good and strengthened him to continue in his new life. the trial ended in his conviction and sentence to the state prison for the term of nine years as i have before said. in the prison he acquainted with the poor wretch to in the beginning of my talk jack hunt the writer of the letter which i am going to read. you will see that the acquaintanceship bore fruit for hunt. when time was out he to st. louis; and from that place he wrote his letter to williams. the letter got no further than the office of the prison warden of course; are not often to receive letters from outside. the prison authorities read this letter but did not destroy it. they had not the heart to do it. they read it to several and eventually it fell into the hands of those ladies of whom i spoke a while ago. the other day i came across an old friend of mine a clergyman who had seen this letter and was full of it. the mere remembrance of it so moved him that he could not talk of it without his voice breaking. he to get a copy of it for me; and here it is an exact copy with all the of the original preserved. it many slang in it argot but their meaning been in parentheses by the prison authorities mr. w friend charlie if i may call you so: i no you are surprised to get a letter from me but i hope you wont be mad at my writing to you. i want to tell you my thanks for the way you to me when i was in prison it led me to try and be a better man; i guess you thought i did not for what you said at the first go off i didnt but i you was a man who had don big work with good men want no sucker nor want all the it. i used to think at what you said for it i off swearing before my time was up for i saw it want no good nohow the day my time was up you told me if i would shake the cross quit stealing live on the square for it would be the best job i ever done in my life. the state agent give me a ticket to here on the car i thought more of what you said to me but didnt make up my mind. when we got to chicago on the from there to here i off an old leather; her of her pocketbook i no more than got it off when i wished i done it for awhile before that i made up my mind to be a square bloke for on your word but forgot it when i saw the leather was a grip easy to get but i kept to her when she got out of the at a way place i said marm have you lost anything. she tumbled discovered her leather was off gone is this it i giving it to her well if you aint honest she but i got enough to stand that sort of talk so i left her in a hurry. when i got here i had and left i didnt get no work for days as i aint strong enough for roust about on a steam bote for a deck hand the afternoon of the day i spent my last for large round cheese i felt pretty rough was thinking i would have to go on the picking again when i thought of what you once said about a calling on the lord when he was in hard luck i thought i would try it once anyhow but when i it i got stuck on the start all i could get off lord give a poor fellow a chance to square it for for sake amen; i kept a thinking of it over and over as i went along about an hour after that i was in th st. this is what is the cause of my being where i am now about which i will tell you before i get done writing. as i was walking along herd a big noise saw a horse running away with a carriage with in it i up a peace of box cover from the side walk run in the middle of the street when the horse came up i smashed him over the head as hard as i could drive the bord split to the horse checked up a little i the his head down until he stopped the gentleman what owned him came running up soon as he saw the were all rite he shook hands with me and gave me a green back my asking the lord to help me come into my head i was so thunderstruck i drop the nor say nothing he saw something was up coming back to me said my boy are you hurt? the thought come into my head just then to ask him for work; i him to take back the bill and give me a job he jump in here talk about it but keep the money he me if i could take care of i said yes for i used to hang round livery often would help clean drive he told me he wanted a man for that work would give me a month bord me. you bet i took that chance at once. that in my little room over the stable i sat a long time thinking over my past life of what had just i just got down on my the lord for the job to help me to square it to bless you for putting me up to it the next morning i done it again got me some new togs clothes a bible for i made up my mind after what the lord had done for me i would read the bible every and morning ask him to keep an eye on me. when i had been there about a week mr. brown thats his name came in my room one and saw me reading the bible he me if i was a christian i told him no he me how it was i read the bible instead of papers well charlie i thought i had better give him a square deal in the start so i told him all about my being in prison about you how i had almost done give up looking for work how the lord got me the job when i him; the only way i had to pay him back was to read the bible square it i him to give me a chance for he to me like a father for a long time told me i could stay then i felt better than ever i had done in my life for i had given mr. brown a fair start with me now i didnt fear no one giving me a back cap his past life running me off the job the next morning he me into the library gave me another square talk advised me to study some every day he would help me one or hours every he gave me a arithmetic a spelling book a geography a writing book he hers me every he me come into the house to every morning got me put in a bible class in the sunday school which i very much for it me to understand my bible better. now charlie the on the square are up ago as you said it is the best job i ever did in my life i another of the same sort right away only it is to god helping me to last a lifetime charlie i wrote this letter to tell you i do think god my herd your for you told me you should pray for me i no i love to read his word tell him all my he me i know for i have plenty of to steal but i dont feel to as i once did now i take more pleasure in going to church than to the theater that wasnt so once our minister and often talk with me a month ago they wanted me to join the church but i said no not now i may be mistaken in my feelings i will wait awhile but now i feel that god me on the first sunday in july i will join the church dear friend i wish i could write to you as i feel but i cant do it yet you no i learned to read and write while i aint got well enough along to write as i would talk; i no i aint all the words rite in this lots of other but you will excuse it i no for you no i was brought up in a poor house until i run away that i never new who my father and mother was i dont no my right name i hope you wont be mad at me but i have as much rite to one name as another i have taken your name for you wont use it when you get out i no you are the man i think most of in the world; so i hope you wont be mad i am doing well i put a month in bank with of the if you ever want any or all of it let me know it is yours. i wish you would let me send you some now. i send you with this a receipt for a year of living age i didnt know what you would like i told mr. brown he said he thought you would like it i wish i was you so i could send you chuck on it would spoil this weather from here but i will send you a box next thanksgiving any way next week mr. brown me into his store as lite porter will advance me as soon as i know a little more he a big granary store wholesale i forgot to tell you of my mission school sunday school class the school is in the sunday afternoon i went out two sunday afternoons and picked up seven kids little got them to come in. two of them new as much as i did i had them put in a class where they could learn something. i dont no much myself but as these kids cant read i get on nicely with them. i make sure of them by going after them every sunday hour before school time i also got to come. tell mack and harry about me if they will come out here when their time is up i will get them at once. i hope you will excuse this long letter all i wish i could see you for i cant write as i would talk i hope the warm weather is doing your good i was afraid when you was bleeding you would die give my respects to all the and tell them how i am doing i am doing well and every one here me as kind as they can mr. brown is going to write to you sometime i hope some day you will write to me this letter is from your very true friend here was true eloquence; irresistible eloquence; and without a single grace or ornament to help it out. i have seldom been so deeply stirred by any piece of writing. the reader of it all the way through on a lame and broken voice; yet he had tried to fortify his feelings by several private of the letter before into company with it. he was upon me to see if there was any hope of his being able to read the document to his with anything like a decent command over his feelings. the result was not promising. however he determined to risk it; and did. he got through tolerably well; but his audience broke down early and stayed in that condition to the end. the fame of the letter spread through the town. a brother minister came and the manuscript put it bodily into a sermon the sermon to twelve hundred people on a sunday morning and the letter them in their own tears. then my friend put it into a sermon and went before his sunday morning congregation with it. it scored another triumph. the house wept as one individual. my friend went on summer vacation up into the fishing of our northern british and carried this sermon with him since he might possibly chance to need a sermon. he was to preach one day. the little church was full. among the people present were the late j. g. holland the late mr. seymour of the new york times mr. page the philanthropist and temperance advocate and i think senator frye of maine. the marvelous letter did its wonted work; all the people were moved all the people wept; the tears in a steady stream down hollands and nearly the same can be said with regard to all who were there. mr. page was so full of enthusiasm over the letter that he said he would not rest until he made pilgrimage to that prison and had speech with the man who had been able to inspire a to write so priceless a tract. ah that unlucky page! and another man. if they had only been in jericho that letter would have rung through the world and stirred all the hearts of all the for a thousand years to come and nobody might ever have found out that it was the piece of fraud and humbuggery that was ever to fool poor confiding with! the letter was a pure swindle and that is the truth. and take it by and large it was without a compeer among it was perfect it was rounded symmetrical complete colossal! the reader it at this point; but we didnt learn it till some miles and beyond this stage of the affair. my friend came back from the woods and he and other and lay once more to inundate with their tears and the tears of said i hard for permission to print the letter in a magazine and tell the watery story of its numbers of people got of the letter with permission to circulate them in writing but not in print; were sent to the sandwich and other far charles dudley warner was at church one day when the worn letter was read and wept over. at the church door afterward he a peculiarly cold iceberg down the back with the question it was the first suspicion that had ever been voiced; but it had that sickening effect which against idol always have. some talk nothing that i know of except that it is too neat and compact and fluent and nicely put together for an ignorant person an unpractised hand. i think it was done by an educated man. the literary artist had detected the literary machinery. if you will look at the letter now you will detect it yourself it is observable in every line. straightway the clergyman went off with this seed of suspicion sprouting in him and wrote to a minister in that town where williams had been jailed and converted; for light; and also if a person in the literary line meaning me might be to print the letter and tell its history. he presently received this answer my dear friend in regard to that letter there can be no doubt as to its genuineness. williams to whom it was written lay in our jail and professed to have been converted and rev. mr. the chaplain had great faith in the genuineness of the change as much as one can have in any such case. the letter was sent to one of our ladies who is a teacher sent either by williams himself or the chaplain of the prison probably. she been greatly annoyed in so much publicity lest it might seem a breach of confidence or be an injury to williams. in regard to its publication i can give no permission; though if the names and were and especially if sent out of the country i think you might take the responsibility and do it. it is a wonderful letter which no christian genius much less one unsanctified could ever have written. as showing the work of grace in a human heart and in a very degraded and wicked one it its own origin and our weak faith in its power to cope with any form of wickedness. mr. brown of st. louis some one said was a hartford man. do all whom you send from hartford serve their master as well? p.s. williams is still in the prison serving out a long sentence of nine years i think. he been sick and threatened with consumption but i have not after him lately. this lady that i speak of with him i presume and will be quite sure to look after him. this letter a few days after it was written and up went mr. stock again. mr. suspicion was laid in the cold cold grave where it apparently it was a suspicion based upon mere internal evidence anyway; and when you come to internal evidence its a big field and a game that two can play at: as witness this other internal evidence discovered by the writer of the note above that it is a wonderful letter which no christian genius much less one unsanctified could ever have written. i had permission now to print provided i suppressed names and and sent my narrative out of the country. so i chose an australian magazine for vehicle as being far enough out of the country and set myself to work on my article. and the set the going again with the letter to work the but meantime brother page had been agitating. he had not the penitentiary but he had sent a copy of the illustrious letter to the chaplain of that institution and accompanied it with apparently he got an answer dated four days later than that other reassuring epistle; and before my article was complete it into my hands. the original is before me now and i here append it. it is pretty well loaded with internal evidence of the most solid description dear page herewith please find the letter kindly me. i am afraid its genuineness cannot be established. it to be addressed to some prisoner here. no such letter ever came to a prisoner here. all letters received are carefully read by of the prison before they go into the hands of the and any such letter could not be forgotten. again charles williams is not a christian man but a dissolute cunning prodigal whose father is a minister of the gospel. his name is an assumed one. i am glad to have made your acquaintance. i am a lecture upon life seen through prison bars and should like to deliver the same in your vicinity. and so ended that little drama. my poor article went into the fire; for whereas the for it were now more abundant and infinitely than they had previously been there were all around me who although longing for the publication before were a unit for suppression at this stage and complexion of the game. they said: wait the wound is too fresh yet. all the of the famous letter except mine suddenly; and from that time onward the aforetime same old drought set in in the as a rule the town was on a spacious grin for a while but there were in it where the grin did not appear and where it was dangerous to refer to the letter. a word of explanation. jack hunt the professed writer of the letter was an imaginary person. the burglar williams harvard graduate son of a minister wrote the letter himself to himself: got it smuggled out of the prison; got it to who had supported and encouraged him in his conversion where he knew two things would happen: the genuineness of the letter would not be or into; and the nub of it would be noticed and would have valuable effect the effect indeed of starting a movement to get mr. williams out of prison. that nub is so ingeniously so casually flung in and immediately left there in the tail of the letter undwelt upon that an indifferent reader would never suspect that it was the heart and core of the epistle if he even took note of it at all this is the nub i hope the warm weather is doing your good i was afraid when you was bleeding you would die give my respects that is all there is of it simply touch and go no dwelling upon it. nevertheless it was intended for an eye that would be swift to see it; and it was meant to move a kind heart to try to effect the liberation of a poor reformed and fellow lying in the fell grip of consumption. when i for the first time heard that letter read nine years ago i felt that it was the most remarkable one i had ever and it so warmed me toward mr. brown of st. louis that i said that if ever i that city again i would seek out that excellent man and kiss the hem of his garment if it was a new one. well i st. louis but i did not hunt for mr. brown; for alas! the of long ago had proved that the benevolent brown like jack hunt was not a real person but a sheer invention of that gifted rascal williams burglar harvard graduate son of a clergyman. we took passage in one of the fast of the st. louis and st. paul packet company and up the river. when i as a boy first saw the mouth of the missouri river it was or miles above st. louis according to the estimate of the wear and tear of the banks have moved it down eight miles since then; and the say that within five years the river will cut through and move the mouth down five miles more which will bring it within ten miles of st. louis. about nightfall we the large and flourishing town of illinois; and before daylight next morning the town of louisiana missouri a sleepy village in my day but a brisk railway center now; however all the out there are railway now. i could not clearly recognize the place. this odd to me for when i retired from the rebel army in i retired upon louisiana in good order; at least in good enough order for a person who had not yet learned how to retreat according to the of war and had to trust to native genius. it to me that for a first attempt at a retreat it was not badly done. i had done no advancing in all that campaign that was at all equal to it. there was a railway bridge across the river here well sprinkled with glowing and a very beautiful sight it was. at seven in the morning we hannibal missouri where my boyhood was spent. i had had a glimpse of it fifteen years ago and another glimpse six years earlier but both were so brief that they hardly the only notion of the town that in my mind was the memory of it as i had known it when i first quitted it years ago. that picture of it was still as clear and vivid to me as a photograph. i stepped ashore with the feeling of one who out of a generation. i had a sort of realizing sense of what the bastille must have felt when they used to come out and look upon paris after years of captivity and note how curiously the familiar and the strange were mixed together before them. i saw the new saw them plainly enough but they did not affect the older picture in my mind for through their solid and mortar i saw the vanished which had formerly stood there with perfect distinctness. it was sunday morning and everybody was abed yet. so i through the vacant streets still seeing the town as it was and not as it is and and metaphorically shaking hands with a hundred familiar which no longer exist; and finally hill to get a comprehensive view. the whole town lay spread out below me then and i could mark and fix every locality every detail. naturally i was a good deal moved. i said many of the people i once knew in this tranquil refuge of my childhood are now in heaven; some i trust are in the other place. the things about me and before me made me feel like a boy again convinced me that i was a boy again and that i had simply been dreaming an unusually long dream; but my spoiled all that; for they forced me to say i see fifty old down yonder into each of which i could enter and find either a man or a woman who was a baby or unborn when i noticed those last or a grandmother who was a plump young bride at that time. from this vantage ground the extensive view up and down the river and wide over the wooded of illinois is very beautiful one of the most beautiful on the mississippi i think; which is a hazardous remark to make for the eight hundred miles of river between st. louis and st. paul afford an unbroken succession of lovely it may be that my affection for the one in question my judgment in its favor; i cannot say as to that. no matter it was satisfyingly beautiful to me and it had this advantage over all the other whom i was about to greet again: it had no change; it was as young and fresh and comely and gracious as ever it had been; whereas the of the would be old and scarred with the of life and marked with their and and would give me no of spirit. an old gentleman out on an early morning walk came along and we the weather and then into other i could not remember his face. he said he had been living here years. so he had come after my time and i had never seen him before. i him various first about a mate of mine in sunday school what of him? he graduated with honor in an eastern college off into the world somewhere at nothing out of knowledge and memory years ago and is supposed to have gone to the dogs. i after another lad altogether the in our village school when i was a boy. he too was graduated with from an eastern college; but life whipped him in every battle straight along and he in one of the years ago a defeated man. i after a young fellow who came to the town to study for one of the when i was a boy. he went at something else before he got through went from medicine to law or from law to medicine then to some other new thing; went away for a year came back with a young wife; fell to drinking then to gambling behind the door; finally took his wife and two young to her and went off to mexico; went from bad to worse and finally there without a cent to buy a shroud and without a friend to attend the funeral. pity for he was the and most cheery and hopeful young fellow that ever was. oh he is all right. here yet; a wife and and is prospering. the first two live here are married and have the other is long ago dead never married. she is all right. been married three times; buried two divorced from the third and i hear she is getting ready to marry an old fellow out in colorado somewhere. got scattered around here and there most everywheres. well now his case is curious! there wasnt a human being in this town but knew that that boy was a perfect chucklehead; perfect dummy; just a stupid ass as you may say. everybody knew it and everybody said it. well if that very boy the first lawyer in the state of missouri today a democrat! account for it? there aint any accounting for it except that if you send a damned fool to st. louis and you dont tell them a damned fool theyll never find it out. theres one thing sure if i had a damned fool i should know what to do with him: ship him to st. louis its the market in the world for that kind of property. well when you come to look at it all around and chew at it and think it over dont it just bang anything you ever heard of? well yes it does seem to. but dont you think maybe it was the hannibal people who were mistaken about the boy and not the st. louis people. oh nonsense! the people here have known him from the very cradle they knew him a hundred times better than the st. louis could have known him. no if you have got any damned that you want to realize on take my advice send them to st. louis. i a great number of people whom i had formerly known. some were dead some were gone away some had some had come to naught; but as a dozen or so of the lot the answer was comforting: in the insane asylum three or four years ago never was out of it from the time she went in; and was always suffering too; never got a shred of her mind back. if he spoke the truth here was a heavy tragedy indeed. years in a madhouse that some young might have some fun! i was a small boy at the time; and i saw those giddy young ladies come tiptoeing into the room where miss sat reading at midnight by a lamp. the girl at the head of the file wore a shroud and a doughface she crept behind the victim touched her on the shoulder and she up and and then fell into she did not recover from the fright but went mad. in these days it incredible that people in so short a time ago. but they did. after asking after such other folk as i could call to mind i finally about myself: oh he well enough another case of damned fool. if sent him to st. louis have sooner. it was with much satisfaction that i recognized the wisdom of told this candid gentleman in the beginning that my name was smith. being left to myself up there i went on picking out old in the distant town and calling back their former out of the moldy past. among them i presently recognized the house of the father of lem fictitious name. it carried me back more than a generation in a moment and landed me in the midst of a time when the of life were not the natural and logical of great general laws but of special and were with very precise and distinct partly punitive in intent partly admonitory; and usually local in application. when i was a small boy lem was on a sunday. he fell out of an empty flatboat where he was playing. being loaded with sin he went to the bottom like an anvil. he was the only boy in the village who slept that night. we all lay awake we had not needed the information from the pulpit that evening that was a case of special judgment we knew that already. there was a ferocious thunderstorm that night and it continuously until near dawn. the the windows rattled the rain swept along the roof in pelting and at the of the inky blackness of the night vanished the over the way out white and blinding for a quivering instant then the solid darkness shut down again and a splitting peal of thunder which to rend everything in the neighborhood to and splinters. i sat up in bed quaking and shuddering waiting for the destruction of the world and it. to me there was nothing strange or incongruous in heavens making such an uproar about lem apparently it was the right and proper thing to do. not a doubt my mind that all the were grouped together this case and observing the awful bombardment of our beggarly little village with satisfaction and approval. there was one thing which disturbed me in the most serious way; that was the thought that this centering of the celestial interest on our village could not fail to attract the attention of the to people among us who might otherwise have escaped notice for years. i felt that i was not only one of those people but the very one most likely to be discovered. that discovery could have but one result: i should be in the fire with lem before the chill of the river had been fairly warmed out of him. i knew that this would be only just and fair. i was increasing the against myself all the time by feeling a secret bitterness against lem for this fatal attention to me but i could not help it this sinful thought in my breast in spite of me. every time the lightning i caught my breath and i was gone. in my terror and misery i meanly to suggest other and mention acts of theirs which were than mine and peculiarly needed punishment and i tried to pretend to myself that i was simply doing this in a casual way and without intent to divert the heavenly attention to them for the purpose of getting rid of it myself. with deep sagacity i put these into the form of sorrowing and that the of those might be to pass unnoticed possibly they may repent. it is true that jim smith broke a window and lied about it but maybe he did not mean any harm. and although tom holmes more bad words than any other boy in the village he probably to repent though he never said he would. and whilst it is a fact that john jones did fish a little on sunday once he didnt really catch anything but only just one small useless mudcat; and maybe that wouldnt have been so awful if he had thrown it back as he he did but he didnt. pity but they would repent of these dreadful things and maybe they will yet. but while i was shamefully trying to draw attention to these poor chaps who were doubtless directing the celestial attention to me at the same moment though i never once suspected that i had heedlessly left my candle burning. it was not a time to neglect even trifling there was no occasion to add anything to the for notice to me so i put the light out. it was a long night to me and perhaps the most distressful one i ever spent. i of remorse for which i knew i had committed and for which i was not certain about yet was sure that they had been set down against me in a book by an angel who was wiser than i and did not trust such important to memory. it struck me by and by that i had been making a most foolish and calamitous mistake in one respect: doubtless i had not only made my own destruction sure by directing attention to those other but had already accomplished theirs! doubtless the lightning had stretched them all dead in their by this time! the anguish and the fright which this thought gave me made my previous seem trifling by comparison. things had become truly serious. i resolved to turn over a new leaf instantly; i also resolved to connect myself with the church the next day if i to see its sun appear. i resolved to cease from sin in all its and to lead a high and blameless life for ever after. i would be punctual at church and visit the sick; carry of victuals to the poor simply to fulfil the regulation conditions although i knew we had none among us so poor but they would smash the basket over my head for my pains; i would instruct other in right ways and take the resulting meekly; i would subsist entirely on i would invade the rum shop and warn the drunkard and finally if i escaped the fate of those who early become too good to live i would go for a missionary. the storm toward daybreak and i dozed gradually to sleep with a sense of obligation to lem for going to eternal suffering in that abrupt way and thus a far more dreadful disaster my own loss. but when i rose refreshed by and by and found that those other were still alive i had a dim sense that perhaps the whole thing was a false alarm; that the entire turmoil had been on account and else. the world so bright and safe that there did not seem to be any real occasion to turn over a new leaf. i was a little subdued during that day and perhaps the next; after that my purpose of slowly out of my mind and i had a peaceful comfortable time again until the next storm. that storm came about three later; and it was the most unaccountable one to me that i had ever experienced; for on the afternoon of that day dutchy was dutchy to our he was a german lad who did not know enough to come in out of the rain; but he was exasperatingly good and had a prodigious memory. one sunday he made himself the envy of all the youth and the talk of all the admiring village by three thousand of scripture without missing a word; then he went off the very next day and got circumstances gave to his death a peculiar impressiveness. we were all bathing in a muddy creek which had a deep hole in it and in this hole the had sunk a pile of green hickory hoop to soak some twelve under water. we were diving and seeing who could stay under longest. we to remain down by holding on to the hoop dutchy made such a poor success of it that he was with laughter and derision every time his head above water. at last he hurt with the and us to stand still on the bank and be fair with him and give him an honest count be friendly and kind just this once and not miscount for the sake of the fun of laughing at him. treacherous were exchanged and all said all right dutchy go ahead well play fair. dutchy in but the instead of beginning to count the lead of one of their number and to a range of blackberry close by and behind it. they humiliation when he should rise after a superhuman effort and find the place silent and vacant nobody there to applaud. they were so full of laugh with the idea that they were continually into muffled time swept on and presently one who was through the said with surprise never mind that said another the joke on him is all the better for it. there was a remark or two more and then a pause. talking and all to peer through the before long the to look uneasy then anxious then terrified. still there was no movement of the placid water. hearts to beat fast and to turn pale. we all out silently and stood on the bank our horrified eyes wandering back and forth from each to the water. so we did with hands which shook so that we hardly knew what we were about. the lot fell to me and i went down. the water was so muddy i could not see anything but i felt around among the hoop and presently a limp wrist which gave me no response and if it had i should not have known it i let it go with such a frightened suddenness. the boy had been caught among the hoop and entangled there helplessly. i fled to the surface and told the awful news. some of us knew that if the boy were dragged out at once he might possibly be resuscitated but we never thought of that. we did not think of anything; we did not know what to do so we did nothing except that the smaller cried piteously and we all frantically into our clothes putting on that came handy and getting them and as a rule. then we away and gave the alarm but none of us went back to see the end of the tragedy. we had a more important thing to attend to: we all flew home and lost not a moment in getting ready to lead a better life. the night presently closed down. then came on that tremendous and utterly unaccountable storm. i was perfectly dazed; i could not understand it. it to me that there must be some mistake. the elements were turned loose and they rattled and and away in the most blind and frantic manner. all heart and hope went out of me and the dismal thought kept floating through my brain if a boy who three thousand by heart is not satisfactory what chance is there for anybody else? of course i never for a moment that the storm was on account or that he or any other inconsequential animal was worthy of such a majestic demonstration from on high; the lesson of it was the only thing that troubled me; for it convinced me that if dutchy with all his was not a delight it would be vain for me to turn over a new leaf for i must infallibly fall hopelessly short of that boy no matter how hard i might try. nevertheless i did turn it over a highly educated fear me to do that but succeeding days of cheerfulness and sunshine came around and within a month i had so backward that again i was as lost and comfortable as ever. breakfast time while i mused these and these ancient back to mind; so i got me back into the present and went down the hill. on my way through town to the hotel i saw the house which was my home when i was a boy. at present rates the people who now occupy it are of no more value than i am; but in my time they would have been worth not less than five hundred apiece. they are colored folk. after breakfast i went out alone again intending to hunt up some of the and see how this generation of might compare with their who had sat with me in those and had probably taken me as a model though i do not remember as to that now. by the public square there had been in my day a shabby little brick church the old ship of zion which i had attended as a scholar; and i found the locality easily enough but not the old church; it was gone and a trig and rather hilarious new edifice was in its place. the were better dressed and better looking than were those of my time; consequently they did not resemble their and consequently there was nothing familiar to me in their still i them with a deep interest and a yearning wistfulness and if i had been a girl i would have cried; for they were the offspring and represented and occupied the of and some of whom i had loved to love and some of whom i had loved to hate but all of whom were dear to me for the one reason or the other so many years gone by and lord where be they now! i was mightily stirred and would have been grateful to be to remain unmolested and look my fill; but a superintendent who had been a towheaded mate of mine on that spot in the early recognized me and i a flutter of wild nonsense to those to hide the which were in me and which could not have been spoken without a betrayal of feeling that would have been recognized as out of character with me. making without preparation is no gift of mine; and i was resolved to shirk any new opportunity but in the next and larger i found myself in the rear of the assemblage; so i was very willing to go on the platform a moment for the sake of getting a good look at the on the spur of the moment i could not recall any of the old idiotic talks which used to insult me with when i was a pupil there; and i was sorry for this since it would have given me time and excuse to dawdle there and take a long and satisfying look at what i feel at liberty to say was an array of fresh young comeliness not matchable in another of the same size. as i merely to get a chance to inspect; and as i strung out the random rubbish solely to prolong the inspection i it but decent to confess these low and i did so. if the model boy was in either of these i did not see him. the model boy of my time we never had but the one was perfect: perfect in manners perfect in dress perfect in conduct perfect in filial piety perfect in exterior godliness; but at bottom he was a prig; and as for the contents of his skull they could have changed place with the contents of a pie and nobody would have been the worse off for it but the pie. this reproachlessness was a standing reproach to every lad in the village. he was the admiration of all the and the detestation of all their sons. i was told what of him but as it was a disappointment to me i will not enter into details. he in life. during my three days stay in the town i woke up every morning with the impression that i was a boy for in my the were all young again and as they had in the old times but i went to bed a hundred years old every night for meantime i had been seeing those as they are now. of course i some along at first before i had become adjusted to the changed state of things. i met young ladies who did not seem to have changed at all; but they turned out to be the of the young ladies i had in mind sometimes their when you are told that a stranger of fifty is a grandmother there is nothing surprising about it; but if on the contrary she is a person whom you knew as a little girl it impossible. you say to yourself how can a little girl be a grandmother. it some little time to accept and realize the fact that while you have been growing old your have not been standing still in that matter. i noticed that the greatest observable were with the not the men. i saw men whom thirty years had changed but slightly; but their had grown old. these were good it is very wearing to be good. there was a saddler whom i wished to see; but he was gone. dead these many years they said. once or twice a day the saddler used to go tearing down the street putting on his coat as he went; and then everybody knew a steamboat was coming. everybody knew also that john was not anybody by the boat or any freight either; and must have known that everybody knew this still it made no difference to him; he liked to seem to himself to be a hundred thousand tons of by this boat and so he went on all his life enjoying being faithfully on hand to receive and receipt for those in case by any miracle they should come. a malicious quincy paper used always to refer to this town in derision as landing. was one of my earliest i envied him his rush of imaginary business and the display he was able to make of it before as he went flying down the street struggling with his fluttering coat. but there was a carpenter who was my chiefest hero. he was a mighty liar but i did not know that; i everything he said. he was a romantic sentimental melodramatic fraud and his bearing impressed me with awe. i vividly remember the first time he took me into his confidence. he was a board and every now and then he would pause and heave a deep sigh; and occasionally mutter broken confused and not intelligible but out of their midst an ejaculation sometimes escaped which made me shiver and did me good: one was o god it is his blood! i sat on the and humbly and shudderingly admired him; for i he was full of crime. at last he said in a low voice then i will tell you some in my history; for oh i must relieve my burdened soul or i shall die! he me once more to be as silent as the grave; then he told me he was a murderer. he put down his plane held his hands out before him them sadly and said the effect which this had upon me was an inspiration to him and he turned himself loose upon his subject with interest and energy. he left and went into details with his first murder; described it told what he had taken to avert suspicion; then to his second homicide his third his fourth and so on. he had always done his with a and he made all my rise by suddenly snatching it out and showing it to me. at the end of this first seance i went home with six of his fearful among my freightage and found them a great help to my which had been sluggish for a while back. i sought him again and again on my saturday in fact i spent the summer with him all of it which was valuable to me. his never diminished for he threw something fresh and stirring in the way of horror into each successive murder. he always gave names everything. this by and by me to note two things: that he had his in every quarter of the globe and that these were always lynch. the destruction of the went serenely on saturday after saturday until the original thirty had multiplied to sixty and more to be heard from yet; then my curiosity got the better of my timidity and i how it that these justly punished all bore the same name. my hero said he had never that dark secret to any living being; but felt that he could trust me and therefore he would lay bare before me the story of his sad and blighted life. he had loved one too fair for earth and she had with all the sweet affection of her pure and noble nature. but he had a rival a base hireling archibald lynch who said the girl should be his or he would dye his hands in her hearts best blood. the carpenter innocent and happy in young dream gave no weight to the threat but led his darling to the altar and there the two were made one; there also just as the hands were stretched in blessing over their the fell deed was done with a knife and the bride fell a corpse at her and what did the husband do? he plucked forth that knife and kneeling by the body of his lost one swore to consecrate his life to the extermination of all the human scum that bear the hated name of lynch. that was it. he had been hunting down the and them from that day to this twenty years. he had always used that same consecrated knife; with it he had murdered his long array of and with it he had left upon the forehead of each victim a peculiar mark a cross deeply incised. said he the cross of the mysterious avenger is known in europe in america in china in siam in the tropics in the polar in the deserts of asia in all the earth. wherever in the uttermost parts of the globe a lynch there the mysterious cross been seen and those who have seen it have and said it is his mark he been here. you have heard of the mysterious avenger look upon him for before you no less a person! but beware breathe not a word to any soul. be silent and wait. some morning this town will flock aghast to view a gory corpse; on its brow will be seen the awful sign and men will tremble and whisper he been here it is the mysterious mark! you will come here but i shall have vanished; you will see me no more. this ass had been reading the no doubt and had had his poor romantic head turned by it; but as i had not yet seen the book then i took his for truth and did not suspect that he was a plagiarist. however we had a lynch living in the town; and the more i reflected upon his impending doom the more i could not sleep. it my plain duty to save him and a still plainer and more important duty to get some sleep for myself so at last i to go to mr. lynch and tell him what was about to happen to him under strict secrecy. i advised him to fly and certainly expected him to do it. but he at me; and he did not stop there; he led me down to the shop gave the carpenter a jeering and scornful lecture upon his silly his face made him get down on his and beg then went off and left me to contemplate the cheap and pitiful ruin of what in my eyes had so lately been a majestic and incomparable hero. the carpenter his knife and doomed this lynch in his usual volcanic style the size of his fateful words undiminished; but it was all wasted upon me; he was a hero to me no longer but only a poor foolish exposed humbug. i was ashamed of him and ashamed of myself; i took no further interest in him and never went to his shop any more. he was a heavy loss to me for he was the greatest hero i had ever known. the fellow must have had some talent; for some of his imaginary were so vividly and dramatically described that i remember all their details yet. the people of hannibal are not more changed than is the town. it is no longer a village; it is a city with a mayor and a council and waterworks and probably a debt. it fifteen thousand people is a thriving and energetic place and is paved like the rest of the west and south where a street and a good sidewalk are things so seldom seen that one them when he does see them. the customary center in hannibal now and there is a new depot which cost a hundred thousand in my time the town had no specialty and no commercial grandeur; the daily packet usually landed a passenger and bought a catfish and took away another passenger and a hatful of freight; but now a huge commerce in lumber grown up and a large miscellaneous commerce is one of the a deal of money hands there now. bear creek so perhaps because it was always so particularly bare of is hidden out of sight now under and of piled lumber and nobody but an expert can find it. i used to get in it every summer regularly and be drained out and inflated and set going again by some chance enemy; but not enough of it is unoccupied now to drown a person in. it was a famous breeder of and fever in its day. i remember one summer when everybody in town had this disease at once. many were shaken down and all the were so that the town had to be rebuilt. the chasm or gorge between leap and the hill west of it is supposed by to have been by glacial action. this is a mistake. there is an interesting cave a mile or two below hannibal among the i would have liked to revisit it but had not time. in my time the person who then owned it turned it into a mausoleum for his daughter aged fourteen. the body of this poor child was put into a copper cylinder filled with alcohol and this was suspended in one of the dismal of the cave. the top of the cylinder was removable; and it was said to be a common thing for the order of to drag the dead face into view and examine it and comment upon it. the slaughterhouse is gone from the mouth of bear creek and so is the small jail or calaboose which once stood in its neighborhood. a citizen do you remember when jimmy finn the town drunkard was burned to death in the calaboose? observe now how history becomes defiled through lapse of time and the help of the bad of men. jimmy finn was not burned in the calaboose but a natural death in a tan vat of a combination of delirium and spontaneous combustion. when i say natural death i mean it was a natural death for jimmy finn to die. the calaboose victim was not a citizen; he was a poor stranger a harmless tramp. i know more about his case than anybody else; i knew too much of it in that bygone day to relish speaking of it. that tramp was wandering about the streets one chilly evening with a pipe in his mouth and begging for a match; he got neither nor courtesy; on the contrary a troop of bad little him around and amused themselves with nagging and annoying him. i assisted; but at last some appeal which the wayfarer made for forbearance accompanying it with a pathetic reference to his forlorn and friendless condition touched such sense of shame and remnant of right feeling as were left in me and i went away and got him some and then me home and to bed heavily weighted as to conscience and unbuoyant in spirit. an hour or two afterward the man was and locked up in the calaboose by the marshal large name for a constable but that was his title. at two in the morning the church rang for fire and everybody turned out of course i with the rest. the tramp had used his disastrously: he had set his straw bed on fire and the oaken sheathing of the room had caught. when i the ground two hundred men and stood together transfixed with horror and staring at the windows of the jail. behind the iron bars and tugging frantically at them and screaming for help stood the tramp; he like a black object set against a sun so white and intense was the light at his back. that marshal could not be found and he had the only key. a was quickly improvised and the thunder of its upon the door had so encouraging a sound that the broke into wild cheering and the merciful battle won. but it was not so. the were too strong; they did not yield. it was said that the mans still held fast to the bars after he was dead; and that in this position the wrapped him about and him. as to this i do not know. what was seen after i recognized the face that was pleading through the bars was seen by not by me. i saw that face so situated every night for a long time afterward; and i myself as guilty of the mans death as if i had given him the purposely that he might burn himself up with them. i had not a doubt that i should be if my connection with this tragedy were found out. the and the of that time are burnt into my memory and the study of them me as much now as they themselves distressed me then. if anybody spoke of that grisly matter i was all in a moment and alert to hear what might be said for i was always and to find out that i was suspected; and so fine and so delicate was the perception of my guilty conscience that it often detected suspicion in the most purposeless and in of the eye which had no significance but which sent me shivering away in a panic of fright just the same. and how sick it made me when somebody howsoever carelessly and barren of intent the remark that murder will out! for a boy of ten years i was carrying a pretty weighty cargo. all this time i was blessedly forgetting one thing the fact that i was an inveterate talker in my sleep. but one night i awoke and found my bedmate my younger brother sitting up in bed and me by the light of the moon. i said i came to a sitting posture in an instant with my in my throat and my hair on end. about what? i dont know what you are talking about. i think you are sick or crazy or something. but anyway awake and ill get to sleep while got a chance. he fell asleep and i lay there in a cold sweat turning this new terror over in the whirling chaos which did duty as my mind. the burden of my thought was how much did i divulge? how much does he know? what a distress is this uncertainty! but by and by i an idea i would wake my brother and probe him with a supposititious case. i shook him up and said i dont mean you idiot i mean the man. suppose a man should come to you drunk and borrow a knife or a tomahawk or a pistol and you forgot to tell him it was loaded and i dont mean the tomahawk and i didnt say the tomahawk; i said the pistol. now dont you keep breaking in that way because this is serious. theres been a man well then suppose you forgot to tell him to be careful with it because it was loaded and he went off and shot himself with that pistol fooling with it you know and probably doing it by accident being drunk. well would it be murder? no no. i dont mean his act i mean yours: would you be a murderer for letting him have that pistol? well i should think i was guilty of something maybe murder yes probably murder but i dont quite know. this made me very uncomfortable. however it was not a decisive verdict. i should have to set out the real case there to be no other way. but i would do it cautiously and keep a watch out for suspicious effects. i said i was supposing a case but i am coming to the real one now. do you know how the man came to be burned up in the calaboose? well the way of it was this. the man wanted some to light his pipe. a boy got him some. the man set fire to the calaboose with those very and burnt himself up. if the man was drunk and the boy knew it the boy murdered that man. this is certain. faint sickening crept along all the of my body and i to know how a person who his death sentence pronounced from the bench. i to hear what my brother would say next. i i knew what it would be and i was right. he said i had nothing to say; so i said nothing. i simply then he added yes before you got half through telling about the thing i knew perfectly well who the boy was; it was ben i came out of my collapse as one who from the dead. i said with admiration i said to myself how splendid that is! this is a habit which must be cultivated. when you were talking in your sleep you kept mumbling something about which i make anything out of; but just now when you to tell me about the man and the calaboose and the i that in your sleep you ben two or three times; so i put this and that together you see and right away i knew it was ben that burnt that man up. no i said; i believe that this will be a lesson to him. i shall keep an eye on him of course for that is but right; but if he stops where he is and it shall never be said that i him. and now my burden being to other my soon faded away. the day before we left hannibal a curious thing fell under my notice the surprising spread which longitudinal time there. i learned it from one of the most unostentatious of men the colored coachman of a friend of mine who three miles from town. he was to call for me at the park hotel at . p.m. and drive me out. but he missed it considerably did not arrive till ten. he excused himself by saying de time is an hour en a half slower in de country en what it is in de town; be in plenty time boss. sometimes we out early for church sunday en up dah right plum in de middle er de sermon. in de time. a body cant make no bout it. from st. louis northward there are all the enlivening of the presence of active energetic intelligent prosperous practical the people dont dream they work. the happy result is manifest all around in the substantial outside aspect of things and the of wholesome life and comfort that everywhere appear. quincy is a notable example a brisk handsome city; and now as formerly interested in art letters and other high things. but marion city is an exception. marion city gone backwards in a most unaccountable way. this metropolis so well that the city to its name in the very beginning with full confidence; but it was bad prophecy. when i first saw marion city years ago it contained one street and nearly or quite six it but one house now and this one in a state of ruin is getting ready to follow the former five into the river. doubtless marion city was too near to quincy. it had another disadvantage: it was situated in a flat mud bottom below highwater mark whereas quincy high up on the slope of a hill. in the beginning quincy had the aspect and ways of a model new england town: and these she yet: broad clean streets trim neat and fine stately of commercial and there are ample a well kept park and many attractive library a couple of some handsome and costly and a grand courthouse with grounds which occupy a square. the population of the city is thirty thousand. there are some large here and manufacturing of many is done on a great scale. la grange and canton are growing but i missed alexandria; was told it was under water but would come up to blow in the summer. keokuk was easily recognizable. i lived there in an extraordinary year there in the boom was something wonderful. everybody bought everybody sold except and they always hold on; and when the tide they get left. anything in the semblance of a town lot no matter how situated was salable and at a figure which would still have been high if the ground had been sodded with the town a population of fifteen thousand now and is with a healthy growth. it was night and we could not see details for which we were sorry for keokuk the reputation of being a beautiful city. it was a pleasant one to live in long ago and doubtless advanced not in that respect. a mighty work which was in progress there in my day is finished now. this is the canal over the it is eight miles long three hundred wide and is in no place less than six deep. its masonry is of the majestic kind which the war department usually in and will endure like a roman aqueduct. the work cost four or five millions. after an hour or two spent with former we up the river again. keokuk a long time ago was an occasional of that erratic genius henry clay dean. i believe i never saw him but once; but he was much of when i lived there. this is what was said of him he life poor and without education. but he educated himself on the of keokuk. he would sit down on a curbstone with his book careless or unconscious of the clatter of commerce and the tramp of the passing and bury himself in his by the hour never changing his position except to draw in his now and then to let a dray pass unobstructed; and when his book was finished its contents however abstruse had been burnt into his memory and were his permanent possession. in this way he acquired a vast hoard of all of learning and had it in his head where he could put his intellectual hand on it whenever it was wanted. his clothes in no respect from a except that they were more and inharmonious and therefore more extravagantly picturesque and several nobody could infer the mastermind in the top of that edifice from the edifice itself. he was an orator by nature in the first place and later by the training of experience and practice. when he was out on a canvass his name was a lodestone which drew the to his stump from fifty miles around. his theme was always politics. he used no for a volcano does not need in a son of late distinguished citizen mr. gave me this incident concerning dean the war feeling was running high in keokuk in and a great mass meeting was to be held on a certain day in the new athenaeum. a distinguished stranger was to address the house. after the building had been packed to its utmost capacity with sweltering folk of both the stage still vacant the distinguished stranger had to connect. the crowd grew impatient and by and by indignant and rebellious. about this time a distressed manager discovered dean on a curbstone the dilemma to him took his book away from him rushed him into the building the back way and told him to make for the stage and save his country. presently a sudden silence fell upon the grumbling audience and eyes sought a single point the wide empty carpetless stage. a figure there whose aspect was familiar to hardly a dozen present. it was the scarecrow dean in foxy shoes down at the of odd colors also down; damaged trousers of antiquity and a world too short some of naked ankle; an unbuttoned vest also too short and a zone of soiled and wrinkled linen between it and the waistband; shirt bosom open; long black handkerchief wound round and round the neck like a bandage; bobtailed blue coat reaching down to the small of the back with which left four of forearm unprotected; small hung on a corner of the bump of whichever bump it was. this figure moved gravely out upon the stage and with sedate and measured step down to the front where it and dreamily the house saying no word. the silence of surprise held its own for a moment then was broken by a just audible ripple of merriment which swept the sea of like the wash of a wave. the figure as before thoughtfully another wave laughter this time. it was by another then a third this last one boisterous. and now the stranger stepped back one pace took off his it into the wing and to speak with deliberation nobody listening everybody laughing and whispering. the speaker on unembarrassed and presently a shot which went home and silence and attention he it quick and fast with other telling things; warmed to his work and to pour his words out instead of dripping them; grew hotter and hotter and fell to discharging and thunder and now the house to break into applause to which the speaker gave no heed but went hammering straight on; unwound his black bandage and cast it away still thundering; presently discarded the bob tailed coat and flung it aside firing up higher and higher all the time; finally flung the vest after the coat; and then for an untimed period stood there like another vesuvius spouting smoke and flame lava and ashes raining and shaking the moral earth with intellectual crash upon crash explosion upon explosion while the mad multitude stood upon their in a solid body answering back with a ceaseless hurricane of through a thrashing snowstorm of waving when dean came said the people thought he was an escaped lunatic; but when he went they thought he was an escaped archangel. burlington home of the sparkling is another hill city; and also a beautiful one; unquestionably so; a fine and flourishing city with a population of thousand and belted with busy of nearly every imaginable description. it was a very sober city too for the moment for a most sobering bill was pending; a bill to forbid the manufacture exportation importation purchase sale borrowing lending stealing drinking smelling or possession by conquest inheritance intent accident or otherwise in the state of iowa of each and every deleterious beverage known to the human race except water. this measure was approved by all the rational people in the state; but not by the bench of judges. burlington the progressive modern full equipment of devices for right and intelligent government; a paid fire department a thing which the great city of new orleans is without but still that relic of antiquity the independent system. in burlington as in all these one a atmosphere which good in the an lately been built there which is in strong contrast with the shabby which usually do duty as in of size. we had not time to go ashore in but had a daylight view of it from the boat. i lived there awhile many years ago but the place now had a rather unfamiliar look; so i suppose it clear the town which i used to know. in fact i know it for i remember it as a small place which it now. but i remember it best for a lunatic who caught me out in the fields one sunday and extracted a from his boot and to carve me up with it unless i acknowledged him to be the only son of the devil. i tried to compromise on an acknowledgment that he was the only member of the family i had met; but that did not satisfy him; he wouldnt have any i must say he was the sole and only son of the devil he his knife on his boot. it did not seem worth while to make trouble about a little thing like that; so i swung round to his view of the matter and saved my skin whole. shortly afterward he went to visit his father; and as he not turned up since i trust he is there yet. and i remember still more pleasantly for its summer i have never seen any on either side of the ocean that them. they used the broad smooth river as a canvas and painted on it every imaginable dream of color from the mottled and of the opal all the way up through cumulative to blinding purple and crimson which were enchanting to the eye but sharply tried it at the same time. all the upper mississippi region these extraordinary as a familiar spectacle. it is the true sunset land: i am sure no other country can show so good a right to the name. the are also said to be exceedingly fine. i do not know. the big drop in thick and fast now: and between stretch of thrifty not desolate solitude. hour by hour the boat and into the great and populous northwest; and with each successive section of it which is revealed surprise and respect gather emphasis and increase. such a people and such as theirs compel homage. this is an independent race who think for themselves and who are competent to do it because they are educated and enlightened; they read they keep abreast of the best and thought they fortify every weak place in their land with a school a college a library and a newspaper; and they live under law. solicitude for the future of a race like this is not in order. this region is new; so new that it may be said to be still in its babyhood. by what it accomplished while still teething one may forecast what it will do in the strength of its maturity. it is so new that the foreign tourist not heard of it yet; and not it. for sixty years the foreign tourist steamed up and down the river between st. louis and new orleans and then gone home and written his book believing he had seen all of the river that was worth seeing or that had anything to see. in not six of all these is there mention of these upper river for the reason that the five or six who this region did it before these were projected. the latest tourist of them all made the same old regulation trip he had not heard that there was anything north of st. louis. yet there was. there was this amazing region with great projected day before yesterday so to speak and built next morning. a score of them number from fifteen hundred to five thousand people. then we have ten thousand; winona ten thousand; moline ten thousand; rock island twelve thousand; la crosse twelve thousand; burlington thousand; dubuque thousand; davenport thirty thousand; st. paul thousand minneapolis sixty thousand and upward. the foreign tourist never heard of these; there is no note of them in his they have sprung up in the night while he slept. so new is this region that i who am comparatively young am yet older than it is. when i was born st. paul had a population of three minneapolis had just a third as many. the then population of minneapolis two years ago; and when he he had seen himself undergo an increase in forty years of thousand nine hundred and he had a fertility. i must explain that the set down above as the population of st. paul and minneapolis are several old. these are far larger now. in fact i have just seen a newspaper estimate which the former thousand and the latter thousand. this book will not reach the public for six or seven yet; none of the will be worth much then. we had a glimpse of davenport which is another beautiful city crowning a hill a phrase which to all these for they are all comely all well built clean orderly pleasant to the eye and cheering to the spirit; and they are all situated upon therefore we will give that phrase a rest. the have a tradition that marquette and joliet where davenport now in . the next white man who there did it about a hundred and seventy years later in . davenport gathered its thirty thousand people within the past thirty years. she more to her now than her whole population years ago. she the usual upper river quota of and of learning; she local an electric alarm and an admirable paid fire department of six hook and ladder four steam fire and thirty davenport is the official residence of two episcopal and catholic. opposite davenport is the flourishing town of rock island which at the foot of the upper a great railroad bridge the two one of the thirteen which fret the mississippi and the between st. louis and st. paul. the charming island of rock island three miles long and half a mile wide to the united and the government turned it into a wonderful park its natural by art and its fine with many miles of near the center of the island one through the of ten vast stone each of which an acre of ground. these are the government for the rock island establishment is a national armory and arsenal. we move up the river always through enchanting scenery there being no other kind on the upper mississippi and pass moline a center of vast manufacturing and clinton and lyons great lumber and presently reach dubuque which is situated in a rich mineral region. the lead mines are very productive and of wide extent. dubuque a great number of manufacturing among them a plow factory which for all christendom in general. at least so i was told by an agent of the concern who was on the boat. he said you show me any country under the sun where they really know how to plow and if i dont show you our mark on the plow they use ill eat that plow; and i wont ask for any sauce to flavor it up with either. all this part of the river is rich in indian history and black was once a puissant name hereabouts; as was further down. a few miles below dubuque is the tete de mort rock or bluff to the top of which the french drove a band of in early times and them up there with death for a certainty and only the manner of it matter of choice to starve or jump off and kill themselves. black hawk adopted the ways of the white people toward the end of his life; and when he he was buried near des in christian fashion modified by indian custom; that is to say clothed in a christian military uniform and with a christian cane in his hand but in the grave in a sitting posture. formerly a horse had always been buried with a chief. the substitution of the cane that black haughty nature was really humbled and he expected to walk when he got over. we noticed that above dubuque the water of the mississippi was rich and beautiful and semitransparent with the sun on it. of course the water was nowhere as clear or of as fine a complexion as it is in some other of the year; for now it was at flood stage and therefore dimmed and blurred by the mud manufactured from caving banks. the majestic that overlook the river along through this region charm one with the grace and variety of their and the soft beauty of their adornment. the steep verdant slope whose base is at the waters edge is topped by a lofty rampart of broken turreted which are exquisitely rich and mellow in color mainly dark and dull greens but splashed with other and then you have the shining river winding here and there and yonder its sweep interrupted at by of wooded threaded by silver channels; and you have of distant asleep upon capes; and of stealthy rafts slipping along in the shade of the forest and of white vanishing around remote and it is all as tranquil and reposeful as dreamland and nothing about it nothing to hang a fret or a worry upon. until the unholy train comes tearing along which it presently does ripping the sacred solitude to and with its and the roar and thunder of its rushing and straightway you are back in this world and with one of its ready to hand for your entertainment: for you remember that this is the very road whose stock always goes down after you buy it and always goes up again as soon as you sell it. it me shudder to this day to remember that i once came near not getting rid of my stock at all. it must be an awful thing to have a railroad left on your hands. the locomotive is in sight from the deck of the steamboat almost the whole way from st. louis to st. paul eight hundred miles. these have made havoc with the steamboat commerce. the clerk of our boat was a steamboat clerk before these roads were built. in that day the influx of population was so great and the freight business so heavy that the were not able to keep up with the made upon their carrying capacity; consequently the were very independent and airy pretty as uncle remus would say. the clerk the contrast between the former time and the present thus boat used to land captain on hurricane roof mighty stiff and straight iron ramrod for a spine kid plug tile hair parted behind man on shore off hat and got tons of wheat be great favor if you can take them. but nowadays the captain off his old slouch and all the way around to the back of his and off a bow which he got any ramrod to interfere with and glad to see you smith glad to see you looking well havent seen you looking so well for years what you got for us? smith; and his hat on and just turns his back and goes to talking with somebody else. oh yes eight years ago the captain was on top; but its turn now. eight years ago a boat used to go up the river with every stateroom full and people piled five and six deep on the cabin floor; and a solid deckload of and down below into the bargain. to get a stateroom youd got to prove sixteen of nobility and four hundred years of descent or be personally acquainted with the  that the boots. but its all changed now; plenty above no below theres a patent now and they dont have any more; gone where the woodbine and they didnt go by steamboat either; went by the train. up in this region we met acres of lumber rafts coming down but not floating leisurely along in the way manned with joyous and reckless of fiddling no the whole thing was swiftly along by a powerful sternwheeler modern fashion and the small were quiet orderly men of a sedate business aspect with not a suggestion of romance about them anywhere. along here somewhere on a black night we ran some exceedingly narrow and intricate by aid of the electric light. behind was solid blackness a crackless bank of it; ahead a narrow elbow of water curving between dense of foliage that almost touched our on both sides; and here every individual leaf and every individual ripple stood out in its natural color and flooded with a glare as of noonday intensified. the effect was strange and fine and very striking. we prairie chien another of father and after some hours of progress through varied and beautiful scenery la crosse. here is a town of twelve or thirteen thousand population with electric lighted streets and with of which are stately enough and also architecturally fine enough to command respect in any city. it is a choice town and we made satisfactory use of the hour us in roaming it over though the weather was than necessary. we added several to our list at la crosse; among an old gentleman who had come to this northwestern region with the early and was familiar with every part of it. pardonably proud of it too. he said find scenery between here and st. paul that can give the hudson have the queens bluff seven hundred high and just as imposing a spectacle as you can find anywheres; and island which like any other island in america i believe for it is a gigantic mountain with precipitous sides and is full of indian and used to be full of if you catch the sun just right there you will have a picture that will stay with you. and above winona have lovely and then come the thousand too beautiful for anything; green? why you never saw foliage so green nor packed so thick; its like a thousand plush afloat on a when the water s still; and then the monstrous on both sides of the river ragged rugged just the frame thats wanted; you always want a strong frame you know to throw up the nice of a delicate picture and make them stand out. the old gentleman also told us a touching indian legend or two but not very powerful after this excursion into history he came back to the scenery and described it detail by detail from the thousand to st. paul; naming its names with such facility tripping along his theme with such nimble and confident ease in a word here and there with such a complacent air of t and letting off fine of lurid eloquence at such judicious that i presently to suspect ten miles above winona we come to fountain city nestling sweetly at the of that lift their awful toward the blue of heaven bathing them in virgin that have known no other contact save that of wings. and next we glide through silver waters amid lovely and stupendous of nature that attune our hearts to adoring admiration about twelve miles and strike mount vernon six hundred high with romantic of a once hotel far among the cloud that mottle its dizzy heights sole remnant of mount vernon town of early days now desolate and utterly deserted. and so we move on. past chimney rock we fly noble shaft of six hundred then just before landing at our attention is by a most striking promontory rising over five hundred the ideal mountain pyramid. its conic shape surface girding its sides and its apex like that of a cone cause the spectator to wonder at workings. from its dizzy heights superb of the and below and beyond for miles are brought within its focus. what river scenery can be as we gaze upon this enchanting landscape from the uppermost point of these upon the below? the primeval wildness and awful loneliness of these sublime of nature and god excite feelings of unbounded admiration and the recollection of which can never be from the memory as we view them in any direction. next we have the head and the head carved by hand to adorn and dominate the beauteous stream; and then anon the river and a most charming and magnificent view of the valley before us suddenly upon our vision; rugged clad with verdant from summit to base level prairie holding in their lap the beautiful city of the healing waters puissant foe of disease and that conception of works incomparable lake pepin these constitute a picture whereon the eye may gaze uncounted hours with rapture unappeased and unappeasable. and so we glide along; in due time those majestic the mighty sugar loaf and the sublime rock which latter romantic superstition with a voice; and ofttimes as the birch canoe near at twilight the dusky paddler he the soft sweet music of the winona darling of indian song and story. then upon our vision delightful resort of jaded summer then progressive red wing; and diamond bluff impressive and preponderous in its lone sublimity; then prescott and the st. and anon we see upon us the and of st. paul giant young chief of the north marching with stride in the van of progress of the highest and civilization carving his beneficent way with the tomahawk of commercial enterprise sounding the of christian culture tearing off the reeking scalp of sloth and superstition to plant there the and the schoolhouse ever in his front stretch arid lawlessness ignorance crime despair; ever in his wake bloom the jail the gallows and the pulpit; and ever no she is laid up till the fall season i am helping now to work up the for a guide which the st. louis and st. paul packet company are going to issue this summer for the benefit of who go by that line. when you were talking of rock you spoke of the winona darling of indian song and story. is she the maiden of the rock? and are the two connected by legend? yes and a very tragic and painful one. perhaps the most celebrated as well as the most pathetic of all the of the mississippi. we him to tell it. he out of his conversational vein and back into his without an effort and rolled on as a little distance above lake city is a famous point known as rock which is not only a picturesque spot but is full of romantic interest from the event which gave it its name not many years ago this locality was a favorite resort for the sioux on account of the fine fishing and hunting to be had there and large numbers of them were always to be found in this locality. among the which used to resort here was one belonging to the tribe of firstborn was the name of a maiden who had plighted her troth to a lover belonging to the same band. but her stern had her hand to another a famous warrior and on her wedding him. the day was fixed by her to her great grief. she to accede to the proposal and accompany them to the rock for the purpose of gathering for the feast. on reaching the rock ran to its summit and standing on its edge her who were below for their cruelty and then singing a threw herself from the precipice and dashed them in on the rock below. well it certainly was a tragic business as you say. and moreover there is a startling kind of dramatic surprise about it which i was not looking for. it is a distinct improvement upon the threadbare form of indian legend. there are fifty along the mississippi from whose summit disappointed indian have but this is the only jump in the lot hat turned out in the right and satisfactory way. what of winona? she was a good deal up and jolted: but she got herself together and before the coroner the fatal spot; and said she sought and married her true love and with him to some distant clime where she lived happy ever after her gentle spirit mellowed and by the romantic incident which had so early deprived her of the sweet guidance of a love and a protecting arm and thrown her all unfriended upon the cold charity of a censorious world. i was glad to hear the description of the scenery for it assisted my appreciation of what i saw of it and me to imagine such of it as we lost by the intrusion of night. as the lecturer this whole region is blanketed with indian tales and but i him that people usually merely mention this fact doing it in a way to make a mouth water and judiciously stopped there. why? because the impression left was that these tales were full of incident and imagination a pleasant impression which would be promptly dissipated if the tales were told. i him a lot of this sort of literature which i had been collecting and he that it was poor stuff exceedingly sorry rubbish; and i to add that the which he had himself told us were of this character with the single exception of the admirable story of winona. he granted these but said that if i would hunt up mr. book published near fifty years ago and now doubtless out of print i would find some indian in it that were very far from being barren of incident and imagination; that the tales in hiawatha were of this sort and they came from book; and that there were in the same book which mr. longfellow could have turned into verse with good effect. for instance there was the legend of the undying head. he could not tell it for many of the details had grown dim in his memory; but he would recommend me to find it and enlarge my respect for the indian imagination. he said that this tale and most of the in the book were current among the along this part of the mississippi when he first came here; and that the to book had got them directly from indian and had written them down with strict exactness and without of their own. i have found the book. the lecturer was right. there are several in it which confirm what he said. i will offer two of them the undying head and and an allegory of the the latter is used in hiawatha; but it is worth reading in the original form if only that one may see how effective a genuine poem can be without the and of poetic measure and rhythm an old man was sitting alone in his lodge by the side of a frozen stream. it was the close of winter and his fire was almost out he very old and very desolate. his were white with age and he in every joint. day after day in solitude and he heard nothing but the sound of the tempest sweeping before it the snow. one day as his fire was just dying a handsome young man and his dwelling. his were red with the blood of youth his eyes with animation and a smile played upon his he with a light and quick step. his forehead was bound with a wreath of sweet grass in place of a frontlet and he carried a bunch of in his hand. ah my son said the old man i am happy to see you. come in. come and tell me of your and what strange you have been to see. let us pass the night together. i will tell you of my prowess and and what i can perform. you shall do the same and we will amuse ourselves. he then drew from his sack a curiously wrought antique pipe and filled it with tobacco mild by a mixture of certain leaves handed it to his guest. when this ceremony was concluded they to speak. i blow my breath said the old man and the stream still. the water becomes stiff and hard as clear stone. i shake my retorted the old man and snow the land. the leaves fall from the at my command and my breath them away. the get up from the water and fly to a distant land. the hide themselves from my breath and the very ground becomes as hard as flint. i shake my the young man and warm of soft rain fall upon the earth. the lift up their out of the earth like the eyes of glistening with delight. my voice the the warmth of my breath the music the groves wherever i walk and all nature at length the sun to rise. a gentle warmth came over the place. the tongue of the old man silent. the robin and bluebird to sing on the top of the lodge. the stream to murmur by the door and the fragrance of growing and came softly on the vernal breeze. daylight fully revealed to the young man the character of his entertainer. when he upon him he had the icy visage of winter. to flow from his eyes. as the sun increased he grew less and less in stature and anon had melted completely away. nothing on the place of his but the the trailing arbutus. a small white flower with a pink border which is one of the earliest species of northern the undying head is a rather long tale but it up in weird fairytale variety of incident and energy of movement for what it in see appendix d. we st. paul at the head of navigation of the mississippi and there our voyage of two thousand miles from new orleans ended. it is about a trip by steamer. it can probably be done quicker by rail. i judge so because i know that one may go by rail from st. louis to hannibal a distance of at least a hundred and twenty miles in seven hours. this is better than walking; unless one is in a hurry. the season being far advanced when we were in new orleans the and magnolia were falling; but here in st. paul it was the snow in new orleans we had caught an occasional withering breath from over a crater apparently; here in st. paul we caught a frequent benumbing one from over a glacier apparently. but i wander from my theme. st. paul is a wonderful town. it is put together in solid of honest brick and stone and the air of intending to stay. its was established years ago; and by and by when the postmaster received a letter he carried it to washington horseback to inquire what was to be done with it. such is the legend. two frame were built that year and several were added to the population. a recent number of the leading st. paul paper the pioneer press some statistics which furnish a vivid contrast to that old state of things to wit: population autumn of the present year ; number of letters handled first half of the year ; number of built during of the year ; their cost . the increase of letters over the corresponding six of last year was fifty per cent. last year the new added to the city cost above . st. strength in her commerce i mean his commerce. he is a manufacturing city of course all the of that region are but he is peculiarly strong in the matter of commerce. last year his jobbing trade to upwards of . he a customhouse and is building a costly capitol to replace the one recently burned for he is the capital of the state. he without end; and not the cheap poor kind but the kind that the rich protestant up the kind that the poor irish to erect. what a passion for building majestic the irish it is a fine thing for our architecture but too often we enjoy her stately without giving her a grateful thought. in fact instead of reflecting that every brick and every stone in this beautiful edifice an ache or a pain and a handful of sweat and hours of heavy fatigue by the back and forehead and bones of poverty it is our habit to forget these things entirely and merely glorify the mighty temple itself without one praiseful thought to its humble builder whose rich heart and withered purse it this is a land of and st. paul three public and they contain in the aggregate some forty thousand he one hundred and sixteen and out more than seventy thousand a year in there is an unusually fine railway station; so large is it in fact that it somewhat overdone in the matter of size at first; but at the end of a few it was perceived that the mistake was distinctly the other way. the error is to be corrected. the town on high ground; it is about seven hundred above the sea level. it is so high that a wide view of river and lowland is from its streets. it is a very wonderful town indeed and is not finished yet. all the streets are obstructed with building material and this is being compacted into as fast as possible to make room for more for other people are anxious to build as soon as they can get the use of the streets to pile up their and stuff in. how solemn and beautiful is the thought that the earliest pioneer of civilization the of civilization is never the steamboat never the railroad never the newspaper never the never the missionary but always whiskey! such is the case. look history over; you will see. the missionary comes after the whiskey i mean he after the whiskey next comes the poor immigrant with ax and hoe and rifle; next the trader; next the miscellaneous rush; next the gambler the desperado the highwayman and all their kindred in sin of both and next the smart chap who bought up an old grant that all the land; this the lawyer tribe; the vigilance committee the undertaker. all these bring the newspaper; the newspaper up politics and a railroad; all hands turn to and build a church and a jail and behold civilization is established for ever in the land. but whiskey you see was the in this beneficent work. it always is. it was like a foreigner and excusable in a foreigner to be ignorant of this great truth and wander off into astronomy to borrow a symbol. but if he had been conversant with the he would have said this great upon the ground which st. paul now in june . yes at that date pierre a canadian built the first cabin uncorked his jug and to sell whiskey to the the result is before us. all that i have said of the newness briskness swift progress wealth intelligence fine and substantial architecture and general slash and go and energy of st. paul will apply to his near neighbor minneapolis with the addition that the latter is the bigger of the two these extraordinary were ten miles apart a few ago but were growing so fast that they may possibly be joined now and getting along under a single mayor. at any rate within five years from now there will be at least such a substantial ligament of stretching between them and uniting them that a stranger will not be able to tell where the one siamese twin leaves off and the other combined they will then number a population of two hundred and fifty thousand if they continue to grow as they are now growing. thus this center of population at the head of mississippi navigation will then begin a rivalry as to numbers with that center of population at the foot of it new orleans. minneapolis is situated at the falls of st. anthony which stretch across the river fifteen hundred and have a fall of a waterpower which by art been made of inestimable value though somewhat to the damage of the falls as a spectacle or as a background against which to get your photograph taken. thirty turn out two million barrels of the very of flour every year; twenty produce two hundred million of lumber annually; then there are woolen mills cotton mills paper and oil mills; and sash nail furniture barrel and other without number so to speak. the great here and at st. paul use the new process and mash the wheat by rolling instead of grinding it. sixteen meet in minneapolis and passenger arrive and depart daily. in this place as in st. paul journalism here there are three great ten and three there is a university with four hundred and better still its good are not confined to enlightening the one sex. there are sixteen public with which cost ; there are six thousand and one hundred and there are also seventy existing and a lot more projected. the banks aggregate a capital of and the wholesale jobbing trade of the town to a year. near st. paul and minneapolis are several of interest fort a fortress a a hundred high; the falls of minnehaha lake and so forth. the beautiful falls of minnehaha are sufficiently celebrated they do not need a lift from me in that direction. the lake is less known. it is a lovely sheet of water and is being utilized as a summer resort by the wealth and fashion of the state. it its clubhouse and its hotel with the modern and conveniences; its fine summer and plenty of fishing hunting and pleasant there are a dozen minor summer around about st. paul and minneapolis but the lake is the resort. connected with lake is a most idiotic indian legend. i would resist the temptation to print it here if i could but the task is beyond my strength. the guidebook names the preserver of the legend and compliments his facile pen. without further comment or delay then let us turn the said facile pen loose upon the reader every spring for perhaps a century or as long as there been a nation of red men an island in the middle of lake been by a band of for the purpose of making maple sugar. tradition that many ago while upon this island a young warrior loved and the daughter of his chief and it is said also the maiden loved the warrior. he had again and again been her hand by her the old chief that he was no brave and his old consort him a woman! the sun had again set upon the sugarbush and the bright moon rose high in the bright blue heavens when the young warrior took down his flute and went out alone once more to sing the story of his love the mild breeze gently moved the two gay in his headdress and as he mounted on the trunk of a leaning tree the damp snow fell from his heavily. as he raised his flute to his his blanket slipped from his and lay partly on the snow beneath. he his weird wild but soon felt that he was cold and as he back for his blanket some unseen hand laid it gently on his it was the hand of his love his guardian angel. she took her place beside him and for the present they were happy; for the indian a heart to love and in this pride he is as noble as in his own freedom which him the child of the forest. as the legend a large thinking perhaps that polar and dismal winter weather extended everywhere took up his journey southward. he at length the northern shore of the lake which now his name down the bank and made his way noiselessly through the deep heavy snow toward the island. it was the same spring ensuing that the met. they had left their first retreat and were now seated among the of a large elm which hung far over the lake. the same tree is still standing and universal curiosity and interest. for fear of being detected they almost in a whisper and now that they might get back to camp in good time and thereby avoid suspicion they were just rising to return when the maiden uttered a shriek which was heard at the camp and bounding toward the young brave she caught his blanket but missed the direction of her foot and fell bearing the blanket with her into the great arms of the ferocious monster. instantly every man woman and child of the band were upon the bank but all unarmed. and went up from every mouth. what was to be done? in the meantime this white and savage beast held the breathless maiden in his huge grasp and with his precious prey as if he were used to like this. one deafening yell from the lover warrior is heard above the of of his tribe and dashing away to his wigwam he his faithful knife almost at a single bound to the scene of fear and fright out along the leaning tree to the spot where his treasure fell and springing with the fury of a mad panther pounced upon his prey. the animal turned and with one stroke of his huge paw brought the heart to heart but the next moment the warrior with one plunge of the blade of his knife opened the crimson of death and the dying bear relaxed his hold. that night there was no more sleep for the band or the and as the young and the old about the carcass of the dead monster the gallant warrior was with another plume and ere another moon had set he had a living treasure added to his heart. their for many years played upon the skin of the from which the lake its name and the maiden and the brave long the fearful scene and rescue that made them one for and could never forget their fearful encounter with the huge monster that came so near sending them to the happy it is a perplexing business. first she fell down out of the tree she and the blanket; and the bear caught her and her her and the blanket; then she fell up into the tree again leaving the blanket; meantime the lover goes home and comes back heeled the tree down on the bear the girl down after him apparently for she was up the tree her place in the arms along with the blanket the lover his knife into the bear and whom the blanket? no nothing of the sort. you get yourself all worked up and excited about that blanket and then all of a sudden just when a happy climax imminent you are let down flat nothing saved but the girl. whereas one is not interested in the girl; she is not the prominent feature of the legend. nevertheless there you are left and there you must remain; for if you live a thousand years you will never know who got the blanket. a dead man could get up a better legend than this one. i dont mean a fresh dead man either; i mean a man thats been dead and we struck the now and in a few hours were in that astonishing chicago a city where they are always rubbing the lamp and fetching up the genii and and new it is hopeless for the occasional visitor to try to keep up with chicago she his faster than he can make them. she is always a novelty; for she is never the chicago you saw when you through the last time. the pennsylvania road rushed us to new york without missing schedule time ten minutes anywhere on the route; and there ended one of the most enjoyable i have ever had the good fortune to make. it was nine oclock thursday morning when the susie left the mississippi and old river or what is now the mouth of the red. ascending on the left a flood was pouring in through and over the on the chandler plantation the most northern point in coupee parish. the water completely covered the place although the had given way but a short time before. the stock had been gathered in a large flatboat where without food as we the were huddled together waiting for a boat to tow them off. on the side of the river is island and on it is a large plantation which formerly was pronounced one of the most fertile in the state. the water hitherto it to go in usual but now broad of water told only where fields were. the top of the protecting levee could be seen here and there but nearly all of it was submerged. the have put on a greener foliage since the water in and the woods look bright and fresh but this pleasant aspect to the eye is neutralized by the interminable waste of water. we pass mile after mile and it is nothing but standing up to their in water. a now and again and flies ahead into the long avenue of silence. a pirogue sometimes from the and the red river on its way out to the mississippi but the never turn their to look at our boat. the puffing of the boat is music in this gloom which one most curiously. it is not the gloom of deep or dark but a peculiar kind of solemn silence and impressive awe that one perforce to its recognition. we two negro on a raft tied up in the this morning. they were evidently of the class as they had a supply of meal and three or four with them. their rafts were about twenty square and in front of an improvised shelter earth had been placed on which they built their fire. the current running down the was very swift the mississippi showing a predilection in that direction which needs only to be seen to enforce the opinion of that desperate to find a short way to the gulf. small are in great demand and many have been stolen by piratical who take them where they will bring the greatest price. from what was told me by mr. c. p. ferguson a planter near red river landing whose place just gone under there is much suffering in the rear of that place. the had given up all of a crevasse there as the upper levee had stood so long and when it did come they were at its mercy. on thursday a number were taken out of and off of cabin and brought in many yet remaining. one does not appreciate the sight of earth until he traveled through a flood. at sea one does not expect or look for it but here with fluttering leaves shadowy forest barely visible it is expected. in fact a graveyard if the were above water would be appreciated. the river here is known only because there is an opening in the and that is all. it is in width from fort adams on the left bank of the mississippi to the bank of parish a distance of about sixty miles. a large portion of this was under cultivation particularly along the mississippi and back of the red. when red river proper was a strong current was running directly across it pursuing the same direction as that of the mississippi. after a run of some hours black river was hardly was it before of suffering visible. all the along the banks were stripped of their leaves. one man whom your correspondent spoke to said that he had had one hundred and fifty head of cattle and one hundred head of at the first appearance of water he had to drive them to the high of miles off but he lost fifty head of the beef cattle and sixty black river is quite picturesque even if its are under water. a dense growth of ash oak gum and hickory make the almost impenetrable and where one can get a view down some avenue in the only the dim of distant trunks can be barely distinguished in the gloom. a few miles up this river the depth of water on the banks was fully eight and on all sides could be seen still holding against the strong current the tops of here and there one overturned was surrounded by driftwood forming the nucleus of possibly some future island. in order to save coal as it was impossible to get that fuel at any point to be touched during the expedition a lookout was kept for a woodpile. on rounding a point a pirogue skilfully paddled by a youth shot out and in its bow was a girl of fifteen of fair face beautiful black eyes and demure manners. the boy for a paper which was thrown to him and the couple their tiny craft out into the swell of the boat. presently a little girl not certainly over twelve years paddled out in the little canoe and handled it with all the deftness of an old the little one more like an indian than a white child and when if she were afraid. she had been raised in a pirogue and could go anywhere. she was bound out to pick willow leaves for the stock and she pointed to a house near by with water three deep on the at its back door was a raft about thirty square with a sort of fence built upon it and inside of this some sixteen cows and twenty were standing. the family did not complain except on account of losing their stock and promptly brought a supply of wood in a flat. from this point to the mississippi river fifteen miles there is not a spot of earth above water and to the westward for miles there is nothing but the flood. black river had risen during thursday the and was going up at night still. as we progress up the river become more frequent but are yet still miles apart. nearly all of them are deserted and the off. to add to the gloom almost every living thing to have departed and not a whistle of a bird nor the bark of the squirrel can be heard in this solitude. sometimes a morose gar will throw his tail aloft and disappear in the river but beyond this everything is quiet the quiet of dissolution. down the river now a neatly whitewashed henhouse then a cluster of neatly split or a door and a bloated carcass solemnly guarded by a pair of the only bird to be seen which feast on the carcass as it them along. a in which there was a cheap lithograph of a soldier on horseback as it on told of some hearth by the water and despoiled of this ornament. at dark as it was not prudent to run a place alongside the woods was hunted and to a tall the boat was made fast for the night. a pretty quarter of the moon threw a pleasant light over forest and river making a picture that would be a delightful piece of landscape study could an artist only hold it down to his canvas. the motion of the had the puffing of the steam was and the enveloping silence closed upon us and such silence it was! usually in a forest at night one can hear the piping of the hum of or the dropping of but here nature was dumb. the dark those into this cathedral gave forth no sound and even the of the current die away. at daylight friday morning all hands were up and up the black we the morning was a beautiful one and the river which is remarkably straight put on its garb. the of the haw perfumed the air deliciously and a few blithely along the banks. the were larger and the forest of older growth than below. more fields were than nearer the mouth but the same scene itself drifting out in the negro quarters anchored in confusion against some oak and the modest residence just showing its eaves above water. the sun came up in a glory of carmine and the were brilliant in their varied shades of green. not a foot of soil is to be seen anywhere and the water is apparently growing and for it up to the of the all along the bordering have been denuded of leaves showing how long the people have been at work gathering this fodder for their an old man in a pirogue was how the willow leaves agreed with his cattle. he stopped in his work and with an ominous shake of his head well sir it s enough to keep warmth in their and thats all we expect but its hard on the particularly the small they is dropping off powerful fast. but what can you do? it s all weve got. at thirty miles above the mouth of black river the water from natchez on the mississippi across to the pine of louisiana a distance of miles and there is hardly a spot that is not ten under it. the tendency of the current up the black is toward the west. in fact so much is this the case the waters of red river have been driven down from toward the country and the waters of the black enter the red some fifteen miles above the mouth of the former a thing never before seen by even the the water now in sight of us is entirely from the mississippi. up to trinity or rather troy which is but a short distance below the people have nearly all moved out those remaining enough for their present personal needs. their cattle though are suffering and dying off quite fast as the confinement on rafts and the food they get disease. after a short stop we and soon came to a section where there were many open fields and thickly scattered about. here were seen more of distress. on the inside of the the had built on a scaffold on which they placed the furniture. the were sawed off on top as the ceiling was not more than four from the improvised floor. the very insecure and threatened every moment to float off. near the were cattle standing breast high in the water perfectly impassive. they did not move in their but stood patiently waiting for help to come. the sight was a distressing one and the poor will be sure to die unless speedily rescued. cattle differ from in this peculiar quality. a horse after finding no relief comes will swim off in search of food whereas a beef will stand in its until with exhaustion it in the water and at twelve oclock a hail was given from a flatboat inside the line of the bank. rounding to we ran alongside and general york stepped aboard. he was just then engaged in getting off stock and the boat heartily as he said there was much need for her. he said that the distress was not exaggerated in the least. people were in a condition it was difficult even for one to imagine. the water was so high there was great danger of their being swept away. it had already risen so high that it was approaching the eaves and when it this point there is always imminent risk of their being swept away. if this there will be great loss of life. the general spoke of the gallant work of many of the people in their to save their stock but thought that fully per cent. had perished. already hundred people had received from troy on black river and he had out a great many cattle but a very great quantity and were in dire need. the water was now eighteen higher than in and there was no land between vidalia and the of at two oclock the susie troy miles above the mouth of black river. here on the left comes in little river; just beyond that the ouachita and on the right the these three form the black river. troy or a portion of it is situated on and around three large indian circular in shape which rise above the present water about twelve they are about one hundred and fifty in diameter and are about two hundred apart. the are all built between these and hence are all flooded to a depth of eighteen on their these built by the of years ago are the only of refuge for miles. when we we found them crowded with stock all of which was thin and hardly able to stand up. they were mixed together sheep and cattle. one of these been used for many years as the graveyard and today we saw attenuated cows lying against the marble chewing their cud in contentment after a meal of corn furnished by general york. here as below the remarkable skill of the and in the management of the smaller was noticed. were paddling about in these most ticklish with all the nonchalance of general york put into operation a perfect system in regard to furnishing relief. he a personal inspection of the place where it is what is necessary to be done and then two chartered with flats them promptly to the place when the cattle are loaded and to the pine and of he made troy his headquarters and to this point come for their supply of feed for cattle. on the opposite side of little river which to the left out of black and between it and the ouachita is situated the town of trinity which is hourly threatened with destruction. it is much lower than troy and the water is eight and nine deep in the a strong current through it and it is remarkable that all of its have not gone before. the of both troy and trinity have been for yet some of their stock have to be furnished with food. as soon as the susie troy she was turned over to general york and placed at his disposition to carry out the work of relief more rapidly. nearly all her were landed on one of the to lighten her and she was headed down stream to relieve those below. at tom place a few miles from troy a large flat with about fifty head of stock on board was taken in tow. the were fed and soon some strength. today we go on little river where the suffering is greatest. we down black river quite early under the direction of general york to bring out what stock could be going down river a flat in tow was left in a central locality and from there men her back in the rear of picking up the wherever found. in the loft of a ginhouse there were seventeen head found and after a gangway was built they were led down into the flat without difficulty. taking a skiff with the general your reporter was up to a little house of two rooms in which the water was standing two on the in one of the large rooms were huddled the and cows of the place while in the other the widow taylor and her son were seated on a scaffold raised on the floor. one or two were drifting about in the roam ready to be put in service at any time. when the flat was brought up the side of the house was cut away as the only means of getting the out and the cattle were driven on board the boat. general york in this as in every case if the family desired to leave informing them that major burke of the sent the susie up for that purpose. mrs. taylor said she major burke but she would try and hold out. the remarkable tenacity of the people here to their is beyond all comprehension. just below at a point sixteen miles from troy information was received that the house of mr. tom was in danger and his family were all in it. we steamed there immediately and a sad picture was looking out of the half of the window left above water was mrs. who is in feeble health whilst at the door were her seven the not fourteen years. one side of the house was given up to the work some twelve head besides in the next room the family lived the water coming within two of the bedrail. the stove was below water and the cooking was done on a fire on top of it. the house threatened to give way at any moment: one end of it was sinking and in fact the building a mere shell. as the boat rounded to mr. came out in a dugout and general york told him that he had come to his relief; that the boat was at his service and would remove his family at once to the and on monday a flat would take out his stock as until that time they would be busy. notwithstanding the deplorable situation himself and family were in mr. did not want to leave. he said he thought he would wait until monday and take the risk of his house falling. the around the door perfectly contented seeming to care little for the danger they were in. these are but two of the many. after of privation and suffering people still cling to their and leave only when there is not room between the water and the ceiling to build a scaffold on which to stand. it to be incomprehensible yet the love for the old place was than that for safety. after leaving the place the next spot touched at was the oswald place. here the flat was alongside the ginhouse where there were fifteen head standing in water; and yet as they stood on their were above the top of the entrance. it was found impossible to get them out without cutting away a portion of the front; and so axes were brought into requisition and a gap made. after much labor the and were securely placed on the flat. at each place we stop there are always three four or more bringing information of stock in other in need. notwithstanding the fact that a great many had driven a part of their stock to the some time ago there yet remains a large quantity which general york who is working with indomitable energy will get landed in the pine by tuesday. all along black river the susie been by scores of whose tales are the repetition of those already heard of suffering and loss. an old planter who lived on the river since said there never was such a rise and he was satisfied more than one quarter of the stock been lost. luckily the people first for their work stock and when they could find it and were in a place of safety. the rise which still and was two last night them to get them out to the hence it is that the work of general york is of such a great value. from daylight to late at night he is going this way and that cheering by his kindly words and directing with calm judgment what is to be done. one unpleasant story of a certain merchant in new orleans is told all along the river. it for some years past the have been dealing with this individual and many of them had in his hands. when the overflow came they wrote for coffee for meal and in fact for such little as were required. no response to these letters came and were written and yet these old with under water were even what was necessary to sustain life. it is needless to say he is not popular now on back river. the spoken of as the place of refuge for the people and stock on black river are in parish miles from black river. after filling the flat with cattle we took on board the family of t. s. hooper seven in number who could not longer remain in their dwelling and we are now taking them up little river to the the flood here is rising about three and a half every hours and have set in which will increase this. general york now that our ought to be directed towards saving life as the increase of the water many we intend to go up the in a few minutes and then we will return and go down black river to take off there is a lack of steam transportation here to meet the emergency. the general three chartered with flats in tow but the demand for these to tow out stock is greater than they can meet with promptness. all are working night and day and the susie hardly stops for more than an hour anywhere. the rise placed trinity in a dangerous plight and momentarily it is expected that some of the will float off. troy is a little higher yet all are in the water. have come in that a woman and child have been washed away below here and two off. their are the same who to come off day before yesterday. one would not believe the utter passiveness of the people. as yet no news been received of the steamer delia which is supposed to be the one sunk in storm on lake she is due here now but not even the mail here is most uncertain and this i send by skiff to natchez to get it to you. it is impossible to get accurate data as to past as those who know much about the matter have gone and those who remain are not well versed in the production of this section. general york me to say that the amount of formerly sent should be and sent at once. it is impossible to make any estimate for the people are to the so rapid is the rise. the here are in a state of commotion that can only be appreciated when seen and complete demoralization set in. if are drawn for any particular section hereabouts they would not be certain to be distributed so everything should be sent to troy as a center and the general will have it properly disposed of. he sent for one hundred and if all go to the who are in motion now two hundred will be required. the condition of this rich valley of the lower mississippi immediately after and since the war constituted one of the disastrous effects of war most to be deplored. fictitious property in was not only righteously destroyed but very much of the work which had upon the slave labor was also destroyed or greatly impaired especially the levee system. it might have been expected by those who have not the subject that such important as the construction and maintenance of the would have been assumed at once by the several but what can the state do where the people are under subjection to rates of interest ranging from to per cent. and are also under the necessity of their in advance even of planting at these rates for the privilege of purchasing all of their at per cent. profit? it needed but little attention to make it perfectly obvious that the control of the mississippi river if at all must be by the national government and cannot be by the river must be treated as a unit; its control cannot be under a divided or separate system of administration. neither are the especially interested competent to combine among themselves for the necessary operations. the work must begin far up the river; at least as far as cairo if not beyond; and must be upon a consistent general plan throughout the course of the river. it does not need technical or scientific knowledge to comprehend the elements of the case if one will give a little time and attention to the subject and when a mississippi river commission been constituted as the existing commission is of thoroughly able men of different in life may it not be that their verdict in the case should be accepted as conclusive so far as any a theory of construction or control can be considered conclusive? it should be that upon this board are general general comstock and general of the united professor henry mitchell the most competent authority on the question of hydrography of the united coast survey; b. b. harrod the state engineer of louisiana; b. whose success with the at new orleans is a warrant of his competency and judge taylor of indiana. it would be presumption on the part of any single man however skilled to contest the judgment of such a board as this. the method of improvement by the commission is at once in accord with the of engineering experience and with of nature where meeting our as in nature the growth of and their proneness where to fall across the slope and support the bank at some a fair depth of channel and some degree of permanence so in the project of the engineer the use of timber and brush and the encouragement of forest growth are the main it is to reduce the width where excessive by brushwood at first low but raised higher and higher as the mud of the river under their shelter and finally slope them back at the angle upon which will grow freely. in this work there are many details connected with the of these shelter their so as to present a series of settling a description of which would only complicate the conception. through the larger part of the river works of contraction will not be required but nearly all the banks on the concave side of the must be held against the wear of the stream and much of the opposite banks at critical the works in view this conservative object may be generally works of revetment; and these also will be largely of brushwood woven in continuous or into this veneering process been successfully employed on the missouri river; and in some they have so covered themselves with and have become so overgrown with that they may be as permanent. in these mats rubblestone is to be used in small and in some the dressed slope between high and low river will have to be more or less paved with stone. any one who been on the rhine will have observed operations not unlike those to which we have just and indeed most of the of europe flowing among their own alluvia have required similar treatment in the interest of navigation and agriculture. the levee is the crowning work of bank revetment although not necessarily in immediate connection. it may be set back a short distance from the bank; but it is in effect the requisite parapet. the flood river and the low river cannot be brought into register and to unite in the excavation of a single permanent channel without a complete control of all the and even the abnormal rise must be provided against because this would endanger the levee and once in force behind the works of revetment would tear them also away. under the general principle that the local slope of a river is the result and measure of the resistance of its bed it is evident that a narrow and deep stream should have less slope because it less frictional surface in proportion to capacity; i.e. less perimeter in proportion to area of cross section. the ultimate effect of and confining the and bringing all the of the river into register is to deepen the channel and let down the slope. the first effect of the is to raise the surface; but this by inducing greater velocity of flow inevitably an enlargement of section and if this enlargement is from being made at the expense of the banks the bottom must give way and the form of the waterway be so improved as to admit this flow with less rise. the actual experience with upon the mississippi river with no attempt to hold the banks been favorable and no one can doubt upon the evidence furnished in the of the commission that if the earliest had been accompanied by revetment of banks and made complete we should have today a river navigable at low water and an adjacent country safe from inundation. of course it would be illogical to conclude that the constrained river can ever lower its flood slope so as to make unnecessary but it is that by this lateral constraint the river as a conduit may be so improved in form that even those rare which result from the coincident rising of many will find vent without of ordinary height. that the actual capacity of a channel through alluvium upon its service during been often shown but this capacity does not include anomalous but recurrent it is hardly worth while to consider the for relieving the mississippi river by new since these sensational have themselves only to unthinking and have no support among were the river bed a resort to for surplus waters might be a necessity; but as the bottom is yielding and the best form of outlet is a single deep channel as realizing the least ratio of perimeter to area of cross section there could not well be a more method of treatment than the multiplication of of escape. in the foregoing statement the attempt been made to condense in as limited a space as the importance of the subject would permit the general elements of the problem and the general of the method of improvement which been adopted by the mississippi river commission. the writer cannot help feeling that it is somewhat presumptuous on his part to attempt to present the to an enterprise which for the highest scientific skill; but it is a matter which every citizen of the united and is one of the of reconstruction which ought to be approved. it is a war claim which no private gain and no compensation except for one of the of destruction incident to war which may well be by the people of the whole country. now nearly at the end of our i am induced ere i conclude again to mention what i consider as one of the most remarkable in the national character of the namely their exquisite sensitiveness and soreness respecting everything said or written concerning them. of this perhaps the most remarkable example i can give is the effect produced on nearly every class of by the appearance of captain basil in north america. in fact it was a sort of moral earthquake and the vibration it through the nerves of the republic from one corner of the union to the other was by no means over when i left the country in july a couple of years after the shock. i was in cincinnati when these came out but it was not till july that i a copy of them. one bookseller to whom i applied told me that he had had a few before he understood the nature of the work but that after becoming acquainted with it nothing should induce him to sell another. other of his profession must however have been less scrupulous; for the book was read in city town village and hamlet steamboat and stagecoach and a sort of was sent forth perfectly unprecedented in my recollection upon any occasion whatever. an ardent desire for approbation and a delicate sensitiveness under censure have always i believe been considered as amiable of character; but the condition into which the appearance of captain work threw the republic plainly that these feelings if carried to excess produce a weakness which to imbecility. it was perfectly astonishing to hear men who on other were of some judgment utter their upon this. i never heard of any instance in which the commonsense generally found in national criticism was so by passion. i do not speak of the want of justice and of fair and liberal interpretation: these perhaps were hardly to be expected. other have been but the of the union have apparently no at all; they wince if a breeze over them unless it be tempered with adulation. it was not therefore very surprising that the acute and forcible of a traveler they knew would be to should be received testily. the extraordinary of the business were first the excess of the rage into which they themselves; and secondly the puerility of the by which they attempted to account for the severity with which they fancied they had been treated. not content with that the contained no word of truth from beginning to end which is an assertion i heard made very nearly as often as they were the whole country set to work to discover the why captain hall had the united and why he had published his book. i have heard it said with as much precision and gravity as if the statement had been by an official report that captain hall had been sent out by the british government expressly for the purpose of the growing admiration of england for the government of the united that it was by a commission from the treasury he had come and that it was only in obedience to that he had found anything to object to. i do not give this as the gossip of a coterie; i am persuaded that it is the belief of a very considerable portion of the country. so deep is the conviction of this singular people that they cannot be seen without being admired that they will not admit the possibility that any one should honestly and sincerely find aught to disapprove in them or their country. the american are many of them i believe well known in england; i need not therefore quote them here but i sometimes that they none of them ever thought of curse into classic american; if they had done so on he basil hall between instead of he obadiah it would have saved them a world of trouble. i can hardly describe the curiosity with which i sat down at length to peruse these tremendous still less can i do justice to my surprise at their contents. to say that i found not one exaggerated statement throughout the work is by no means saying enough. it is impossible for any one who the country not to see that captain hall earnestly sought out things to admire and commend. when he it is with evident pleasure; and when he fault it is with evident reluctance and restraint excepting where purely patriotic urge him to state roundly what it is for the benefit of his country should be known. in fact captain hall saw the country to the greatest possible advantage. furnished of course with letters of introduction to the most distinguished and with the still more influential recommendation of his own reputation he was received in full style and state from one end of the union to the other. he saw the country in full dress and had little or no opportunity of judging of it unanointed unannealed with all its on its head as i and my family too often had. captain hall had certainly excellent of making himself acquainted with the form of the government and the laws; and of moreover the best oral commentary upon them in conversation with the most distinguished of these he made excellent use; nothing important met his eye which did not receive that sort of analytical attention which an experienced and philosophical traveler alone can give. this made his highly interesting and valuable; but i am deeply persuaded that were a man of equal penetration to visit the united with no other means of becoming acquainted with the national character than the ordinary intercourse of life he would conceive an infinitely lower idea of the moral atmosphere of the country than captain hall to have done; and the internal conviction on my mind is strong that if captain hall had not placed a firm restraint on himself he must have given expression to far indignation than any he uttered against many in the american character with which he from other circumstances that he was well acquainted. his rule to have been to state just so much of the truth as would leave on the mind of his a correct impression at the least cost of pain to the sensitive folks he was writing about. he his own and feelings and leaves it to be that he good grounds for them; but he the the bitterness which a detail of the circumstances would have produced. if any one to say that some wicked antipathy to twelve millions of is the origin of my opinion i must bear it; and were the question one of mere idle speculation i certainly would not court the abuse i must meet for it. but it is not so. the candor which he and evidently they mistake for irony or totally distrust; his unwillingness to give pain to from whom he received kindness they scornfully reject as affectation and although they must know right well in their own secret hearts how infinitely more they lay at his mercy than he chosen to betray; they pretend even to themselves that he exaggerated the bad of their character and whereas the truth is that he let them off with a degree of tenderness which may be quite suitable for him to exercise however little merited; while at the same time he most industriously magnified their whenever he could possibly find anything favorable. in a remote part of the north lived a man and his sister who had never seen a human being. seldom if ever had the man any cause to go from home; for as his food he had only to go a little distance from the lodge and there in some particular spot place his with their in the ground. telling his sister where they had been placed every morning she would go in search and never fail of finding each stuck through the heart of a deer. she had then only to drag them into the lodge and prepare their food. thus she lived till she attained womanhood when one day her brother whose name was said to her: sister the time is at hand when you will be ill. listen to my advice. if you do not it will probably be the cause of my death. take the with which we kindle our go some distance from our lodge and build a separate fire. when you are in want of food i will tell you where to find it. you must cook for yourself and i will for myself. when you are ill do not attempt to come near the lodge or bring any of the you use. be sure always to fasten to your belt the you need for you do not know when the time will come. as for myself i must do the best i can. his sister to obey him in all he had said. shortly after her brother had cause to go from home. she was alone in her lodge combing her hair. she had just untied the belt to which the were fastened when suddenly the event to which her brother had she ran out of the lodge but in her haste forgot the belt. afraid to return she stood for some time thinking. finally she decided to enter the lodge and get it. for thought she my brother is not at home and i will stay but a moment to catch hold of it. she went back. running in suddenly she caught hold of it and was coming out when her brother came in sight. he knew what was the matter. oh he said did i not tell you to take care. but now you have me. she was going on her way but her brother said to her what can you do there now. the accident go in and stay where you have always stayed. and what will become of you? you have me. he then laid aside his and and soon after both his to turn black so that he could not move. still he directed his sister where to place the that she might always have food. the inflammation continued to increase and had now his first rib; and he said: sister my end is near. you must do as i tell you. you see my and my tied to it. it all my and my and my of all colors. as soon as the inflammation my breast you will take my it a sharp point and you will cut off my head. when it is free from my body take it place its neck in the sack which you must open at one end. then hang it up in its former place. do not forget my bow and one of the last you will take to procure food. the remainder tie in my sack and then hang it up so that i can look towards the door. now and then i will speak to you but not often. his sister again to obey. in a little time his breast was affected. now said he take the club and strike off my head. she was afraid but he told her to muster courage. strike said he and a smile was on his face. all her courage she gave the blow and cut off the head. now said the head place me where i told you. and fearfully she it in all its retaining its animation it around the lodge as usual and it would command its sister to go in such as it thought would procure for her the flesh of different she needed. one day the head said: the time is not distant when i shall be freed from this situation and i shall have to undergo many sore so the superior manito and i must bear all patiently. in this situation we must leave the head. in a certain part of the country was a village inhabited by a numerous and warlike band of in this village was a family of ten young men it was in the spring of the year that the of these blackened his face and his were propitious. ended his fast he went secretly for his at night so that none in the village could overhear or find out the direction they intended to go. though their drum was heard yet that was a common occurrence. ended the usual formalities he told how favorable his were and that he had them together to know if they would accompany him in a war excursion. they all they would. the third brother from the eldest noted for his coming up with his when his brother had speaking up. yes said he i will go and this will be the way i will treat those i am going to fight; and he struck the post in the center of the lodge and gave a yell. the spoke to him saying: slow slow when you are in other peoples so he sat down. then in turn they took the drum and sang their and closed with a feast. the told them not to whisper their intention to their but secretly to prepare for their journey. they all obedience and was the first to say so. the time for their departure drew near. word was given to assemble on a certain night when they would depart immediately. was loud in his for his several times his wife him the reason. besides said she you have a good pair on. quick quick said he since you must know we are going on a war excursion; so be quick. he thus revealed the secret. that night they met and the snow was on the ground and they traveled all night lest should follow them. when it was daylight the leader took snow and made a ball of it then tossing it into the air he said: it was in this way i saw snow fall in a dream so that i could not be tracked. and he told them to keep close to each other for fear of losing themselves as the snow to fall in very large near as they it was with difficulty they could see each other. the snow continued falling all that day and the following night so it was impossible to track them. they had now for several days and was always in the rear. one day running suddenly forward he gave the and struck a tree with his and it broke into as if struck with lightning. said he this will be the way i will serve those we are going to fight. the leader slow slow the one i lead you to is not to be thought of so lightly. again he fell back and thought to himself: what! what! who can this be he is leading us to? he felt fearful and was silent. day after day they traveled on till they came to an extensive plain on the of which human bones were bleaching in the sun. the leader spoke: they are the bones of those who have gone before us. none ever yet returned to tell the sad tale of their fate. again restless and running forward gave the accustomed yell. advancing to a large rock which stood above the ground he struck it and it fell to see said he thus will i treat those whom we are going to fight. still still once more said the leader; he to whom i am leading you is not to be to the rock. fell back thoughtful saying to himself: i wonder who this can be that he is going to attack; and he was afraid. still they continued to see the remains of former who had been to the place where they were now going some of whom had retreated as far back as the place where they first saw the bones beyond which no one had ever escaped. at last they came to a piece of rising ground from which they plainly distinguished sleeping on a distant mountain a mammoth bear. the distance between them was very great but the size of the animal him to be plainly seen. there said the leader it is he to whom i am leading you; here our will commence for he is a and a manito. it is he who that we prize so dearly i.e. wampum to obtain which the whose bones we saw their you must not be fearful: be manly. we shall find him asleep. then the leader went forward and touched the belt around the neck. this said he is what we must get. it the wampum. then they requested the eldest to try and slip the belt over the head who to be fast asleep as he was not in the least disturbed by the attempt to obtain the belt. all their were in vain till it came to the one next the he tried and the belt moved nearly over the head but he could get it no farther. then the one and the leader made his attempt and it on the back of the he said now we must run and off they when one fatigued with its weight another would relieve him. thus they ran till they had the bones of all former and were some distance beyond when looking back they saw the monster slowly rising. he stood some time before he missed his wampum. soon they heard his tremendous howl like distant thunder slowly filling all the sky; and then they heard him speak and say who can it be that to steal my wampum? earth is not so large but that i can find them; and he from the hill in pursuit. as if the earth shook with every jump he made. very soon he the party. they however kept the belt it from one to another and encouraging each other; but he on them fast. said the leader never any one of you when fasting dreamed of some friendly spirit who would aid you as a guardian? a dead silence well said he fasting i dreamed of being in danger of instant death when i saw a small lodge with smoke curling from its top. an old man lived in it and i dreamed he me; and may it be verified soon he said running forward and giving the peculiar yell and a howl as if the came from the of his stomach and what is getting upon a piece of rising ground behold! a lodge with smoke curling from its top this gave them all new strength and they ran forward and it. the leader spoke to the old man who sat in the lodge saying help us; we claim your protection for the great bear will kill us. sit down and eat my said the old man. who is a great manito? said he. there is none but me; but let me look and he opened the door of the lodge when lo! at a little distance he saw the enraged animal coming on with slow but powerful he closed the door. yes said he he is indeed a great manito: my you will be the cause of my losing my life; you my protection and i granted it; so now come what may i will protect you. when the bear at the door you must run out of the other door of the lodge. then putting his hand to the side of the lodge where he sat he brought out a bag which he opened. taking out two small black dogs he placed them before him. these are the i use when i fight said he; and he with both hands the sides of one of them and he to swell out so that he soon filled the lodge by his bulk; and he had great strong teeth. when he attained his full size he and from that moment as from instinct he out at the door and met the bear who in another leap would have the lodge. a terrible combat the skies rang with the of the fierce the remaining dog soon took the field. the at the onset took the advice of the old man and escaped through the opposite side of the lodge. they had not far before they heard the dying cry of one of the dogs and soon after of the other. well said the leader the old man will share their fate: so run; he will soon be after us. they with fresh vigor for they had received food from the old man: but very soon the bear came in sight and again was fast gaining upon them. again the leader the if they could do nothing for their safety. all were silent. the leader running forward did as before. i dreamed he cried that being in great trouble an old man me who was a manito; we shall soon see his lodge. taking courage they still went on. after going a short distance they saw the lodge of the old manito. they immediately and his protection telling him a manito was after them. the old man setting meat before them said: eat! who is a manito? there is no manito but me; there is none whom i fear; and the earth as the monster advanced. the old man opened the door and saw him coming. he shut it slowly and said: yes my you have brought trouble upon me. his he took out his small of black stone and told the young men to run through the other side of the lodge. as he handled the they very large and the old man stepped out just as the bear the door. then striking him with one of the it broke in the bear renewing the attempt with the other that also was broken but the bear fell senseless. each blow the old man gave him like a clap of thunder and the of the bear ran along till they filled the heavens. the young men had now run some distance when they back. they could see that the bear was recovering from the first he moved his and soon they saw him rise on his the old man shared the fate of the first for they now heard his as he was torn in again the monster was in pursuit and fast overtaking them. not yet discouraged the young men kept on their way; but the bear was now so close that the leader once more applied to his but they could do nothing. well said he my will soon be exhausted; after this i have but one more. he advanced his guardian spirit to aid him. once said he i dreamed that being sorely pressed i came to a large lake on the shore of which was a canoe partly out of water ten all in readiness. do not fear he cried we shall soon get it. and so it was even as he had said. coming to the lake they saw the canoe with ten and immediately they scarcely had they the center of the lake when they saw the bear arrive at its lifting himself on his hind legs he all around. then he into the water; then losing his footing he turned back and making the circuit of the lake. meantime the party stationary in the center to watch his he traveled all around till at last he came to the place from whence he then he drinking up the water and they saw the current fast setting in towards his open mouth. the leader encouraged them to paddle hard for the opposite shore. when only a short distance from land the current had increased so much that they were drawn back by it and all their to reach it were in vain. then the leader again spoke telling them to meet their manfully. now is the time said he to show your prowess. take courage and sit at the bow of the canoe; and when it his mouth try what effect your club will have on his head. he and stood ready to give the blow; while the leader who directed the canoe for the open mouth of the monster. rapidly advancing they were just about to enter his mouth when struck him a tremendous blow on the head and gave the the doubled under him and he fell stunned by the blow. but before could renew it the monster all the water he had drank with a force which sent the canoe with great velocity to the opposite shore. instantly leaving the canoe again they fled and on they went till they were completely exhausted. the earth again shook and soon they saw the monster hard after them. their spirits and they felt discouraged. the leader himself by and words to cheer them up; and once more he them if they thought of nothing or could do nothing for their rescue; and as before all were silent. then he said this is the last time i can apply to my guardian spirit. now if we do not succeed our are decided. he ran forward his spirit with great earnestness and gave the yell. we shall soon arrive said he to his at the place where my last guardian spirit in him i place great confidence. do not do not be afraid or your will be we shall soon reach his lodge. run run he cried. returning now to he had all the time in the same condition we had left him the head directing his sister in order to procure food where to place the magic and speaking at long one day the sister saw the eyes of the head brighten as if with pleasure. at last it spoke. oh sister it said in what a pitiful situation you have been the cause of me! soon very soon a party of young men will arrive and apply to me for aid; but alas! how can i give what i would have done with so much pleasure? nevertheless take two and place them where you have been in the habit of the and have meat prepared and cooked before they arrive. when you hear them coming and calling on my name go out and say alas! it is long ago that an accident him. i was the cause of it. if they still come near ask them in and set meat before them. and now you must follow my strictly. when the bear is near go out and meet him. you will take my and and my head. you must then untie the sack and spread out before you my of all colors my my of dried hair and whatever else it as the bear you will take all these one by one and say to him this is my deceased paint and so on with all the other throwing each of them as far as you can. the contained in them will cause him to totter; and to complete his destruction you will take my head and that too you will cast as far off as you can crying aloud see this is my deceased head. he will then fall senseless. by this time the young men will have eaten and you will call them to your assistance. you must then cut the carcass into yes into small and scatter them to the four for unless you do this he will again revive. she that all should be done as he said. she had only time to prepare the meat when the voice of the leader was heard calling upon for aid. the woman went out and said as her brother had directed. but the war party being closely pursued came up to the lodge. she them in and placed the meat before them. while they were eating they heard the bear approaching. untying the and taking the head she had all in readiness for his approach. when he came up she did as she had been told; and before she had the and the bear to totter but still advancing came close to the woman. saying as she was she then took the head and cast it as far from her as she could. as it rolled along the ground the blood excited by the feelings of the head in this terrible scene from the nose and mouth. the bear tottering soon fell with a tremendous noise. then she cried for help and the young men came rushing out partially their strength and spirits. stepping up gave a yell and struck him a blow upon the head. this he repeated till it like a mass of brains while the as quick as possible cut him into very small which they then scattered in every direction. while thus employed happening to look around where they had thrown the meat wonderful to behold they saw starting up and turning off in every direction small black such as are seen at the present day. the country was soon overspread with these black and it was from this monster that the present race of derived their origin. thus overcome their pursuer they returned to the lodge. in the meantime the woman gathering the she had used and the head placed them again in the sack. but the head did not speak again probably from its great exertion to overcome the monster. spent so much time and traversed so vast a country in their flight the young men gave up the idea of ever returning to their own country and game being plenty they determined to remain where they now were. one day they moved off some distance from the lodge for the purpose of hunting left the wampum with the woman. they were very successful and amused themselves as all young men do when alone by talking and jesting with each other. one of them spoke and said we have all this sport to ourselves; let us go and ask our sister if she will not let us bring the head to this place as it is still alive. it may be pleased to hear us talk and be in our company. in the meantime take food to our sister. they went and requested the head. she told them to take it and they took it to their and tried to amuse it but only at times did they see its eyes beam with pleasure. one day while busy in their encampment they were unexpectedly by unknown the skirmish was long contested and bloody; many of their were slain but still they were thirty to one. the young men fought desperately till they were all the attacking party then retreated to a height of ground to muster their men and to count the number of missing and slain. one of their young men had stayed away and in to overtake them came to the place where the head was hung up. seeing that alone retain animation he eyed it for some time with fear and surprise. however he took it down and opened the sack and was much pleased to see the beautiful one of which he placed on his head. starting off it waved gracefully over him till he his party when he threw down the head and sack and told them how he had found it and that the sack was full of and they all at the head and made sport of it. numbers of the young men took the paint and painted themselves and one of the party took the head by the hair and said but the were so beautiful that numbers of them also placed them on their then again they used all of indignity to the head for which they were in turn by the death of those who had used the then the chief them to throw away all except the head. we will see said he when we get home what we can do with it. we will try to make it shut its eyes. when they their they took it to the and hung it up before the fire fastening it with raw hide soaked which would shrink and become by the action of the fire. we will then see they said if we cannot make it shut its eyes. meantime for several days the sister had been waiting for the young men to bring back the head; till at last getting impatient she went in search of it. the young men she found lying within short of each other dead and covered with wounds. various other lay scattered in different around them. she for the head and sack but they were nowhere to be found. she raised her voice and wept and blackened her face. then she in different till she came to the place from whence the head had been taken. then she found the magic bow and where the young men ignorant of their had left them. she thought to herself that she would find her head and came to a piece of rising ground and there saw some of his and these she carefully put up and hung upon the branch of a tree till her return. at dusk she at the first lodge of a very extensive village. here she used a charm common among when they wish to meet with a kind reception. on to the old man and woman of the lodge she was kindly received. she made known her errand. the old man to aid her and told her the head was hung up before the and that the of the village with their young men kept watch over it continually. the former are considered as she said she only wished to see it and would be satisfied if she could only get to the door of the lodge. she knew she had not sufficient power to take it by force. come with me said the indian i will take you there. they went and they took their seats near the door. the was filled with amusing themselves with and constantly keeping up a fire to smoke the head as they said to make dry meat. they saw the head move and not knowing what to make of it one spoke and said: ha! ha! it is beginning to feel the effects of the smoke. the sister up from the door and her eyes met those of her brother and tears rolled down the of the head. well said the chief i thought we would make you do something at last. look! look at it shedding tears said he to those around him; and they all and their upon it. the chief looking around and observing the woman after some time said to the man who came with her: who have you got there? i have never seen that woman before in our village. yes the man you have seen her; she is a relation of mine and seldom goes out. she stays at my lodge and me to allow her to come with me to this place. in the center of the lodge sat one of those young men who are always forward and fond of boasting and themselves before why said he i have seen her often and it is to this lodge i go almost every night to court her. all the and continued their the young man did not know he was telling a lie to the advantage who by that means escaped. she returned to the mans lodge and immediately set out for her own country. coming to the spot where the of her adopted lay she placed them together their toward the east. then taking an ax which she had she cast it up into the air crying out get up from under it or it will fall on you. this she repeated three times and the third time the all arose and stood on their rubbing his eyes and stretching himself. why said he i have myself. no indeed said one of the do you not know we were all and that it is our sister who brought us to life? the young men took the of their and burned them. soon after the woman went to procure for them in a distant country they knew not where; but she returned with ten young which she gave to the ten young men beginning with the eldest. stepped to and fro uneasy lest he should not get the one he liked. but he was not disappointed for she fell to his lot. and they were well matched for she was a female magician. they then all moved into a very large lodge and their sister told them that the must now take turns in going to her head every night trying to untie it. they all said they would do so with pleasure. the eldest made the first attempt and with a rushing noise she fled through the air. toward daylight she returned. she had been unsuccessful as she in untying only one of the all took their turns regularly and each one in untying only one knot each time. but when the went she the work as soon as she the lodge; although it had always been occupied still the never could see any one. for ten nights now the smoke had not but filled the lodge and drove them out. this last night they were all driven out and the young woman carried off the head. the young people and the sister heard the young woman coming high through the air and they heard her saying: prepare the body of our brother. and as soon as they heard it they went to a small lodge where the black body of lay. his sister cutting the neck part from which the neck had been severed. she cut so deep as to cause it to bleed; and the who were present by rubbing the body and the blackness. in the meantime the one who brought it by cutting the neck of the head that also to bleed. as soon as she they placed that close to the body and by aid of and various other means in to all his former beauty and manliness. all in the happy termination of their and they had spent some time joyfully together when said: now i will divide the wampum and getting the belt which contained it he with the eldest giving it in equal but the got the most splendid and beautiful as the bottom of the belt held the and they were told that since they had all once and were to life they were no longer mortal but spirits and they were assigned different stations in the invisible world. only place was however he was to direct the west wind hence generally there to remain for ever. they were as they had it in their power to do good to the of the earth and forgetting their in the wampum to give all things with a liberal hand. and they were also that it should also be held by them sacred; those or of the pale hue to be emblematic of peace while those of the hue would lead to evil and war. the spirits then amid and took their flight to their respective on high; while with his sister into the below.